•■-■I >■ i ■ - ■■ ■ -* 



A hi twr 1 hV 

flit: 11 ARP RACJfMAN 



|j Mini) TUUM.I) 

mm a 


HAnU E.Uoi>N Wt lift El 1II* j E .IMHIH 













RAGE 

Richard Bachman 


A high school Show-and-Tell session explodes into a nightmare of evil... 

So you understand that when we 
increase the number of variables, 
the axioms themselves never change. 

-Mrs. Jean Underwood 

Teacher, teacher, ring the bell, 

My lessons all to you I’ll tell, 

And when my day at school is through, 

I’ll know more than aught I knew. 

-Children’s rhyme, c. 1880 



Chapter 01 


The morning I got it on was nice; a nice May morning. What made it nice was that I’d 
kept my breakfast down, and the squirrel I spotted in Algebra II. 

I sat in the row farthest from the door, which is next to the windows, and I spotted the 
squirrel on the lawn. The lawn of Placerville High School is a very good one. It does not 
fuck around. It comes right up to the building and says howdy. No one, at least in my four 
years at PHS, has tried to push it away from the building with a bunch of flowerbeds or 
baby pine trees or any of that happy horseshit. It comes right up to the concrete 
foundation, and there it grows, like it or not. It is true that two years ago at a town meeting 
some bag proposed that the town build a pavilion in front of the school, complete with a 
memorial to honor the guys who went to Placerville High and then got bumped off in one 
war or another. My friend Joe McKennedy was there, and he said they gave her nothing 
but a hard way to go. I wish I had been there. The way Joe told it, it sounded like a real 
good time. Two years ago. To the best of my recollection, that was about the time I started 
to lose my mind. 



Chapter 02 


So there was the squirrel, running through the grass at 9:05 in the morning, not ten feet 
from where I was listening to Mrs. Underwood taking us back to the basics of algebra in 
the wake of a horrible exam that apparently no one had passed except me and Ted Jones. I 
was keeping an eye on him, I can tell you. The squirrel, not Ted. 

On the board, Mrs. Underwood wrote this: a = 16. “Miss Cross,” she said, turning back. 
“Tell us what that equation means, if you please.” 

“It means that a is sixteen,” Sandra said. Meanwhile the squirrel ran back and forth in 
the grass, tail bushed out, black eyes shining bright as buckshot. A nice fat one. Mr. 
Squirrel had been keeping down more breakfasts than I lately, but this morning’s was 
riding as light and easy as you please. I had no shakes, no acid stomach. I was riding cool. 

“All right,” Mrs. Underwood said. “Not bad. But it’s not the end, is it? No. Would 
anyone care to elaborate on this fascinating equation?” 

I raised my hand, but she called on Billy Sawyer. “Eight plus eight,” he blurted. 

“Explain. “ 

“I mean it can be ... ” Billy fidgeted. He ran his fingers over the graffiti etched into the 
surface of his desk; SM L DK, HOT SHIT, TOMMY ‘73. “See, if you add eight and eight, 
it means ... “ 

“Shall I lend you my thesaurus?” Mrs. Underwood asked, smiling alertly. My stomach 
began to hurt a little, my breakfast started to move around a little, so I looked back at the 
squirrel for a while. Mrs. Underwood’s smile reminded me of the shark in Jaws. 

Carol Granger raised her hand. Mrs. Underwood nodded. “Doesn’t he mean that eight 
plus eight also fulfills the equation’s need for truth?” 

“I don’t know what he means,” Mrs. Underwood said. 

A general laugh. “Can you fulfill the equation’s truth in any other ways, Miss Granger?” 

Carol began, and that was when the intercom said: “Charles Decker to the office, please. 
Charles Decker. Thank you.” 

I looked at Mrs. Underwood, and she nodded. My stomach had begun to feel shriveled 
and old. I got up and left the room. When I left, the squirrel was still scampering. 

I was halfway down the hall when I thought I heard Mrs. Underwood coming after me, 
her hands raised into twisted claws, smiling her big shark smile. We don’t need boys of 
your type around here ... boys of your type belong in Greenmantle ...or the reformatory 
...or the state hospital for the criminally insane ...so get out! Get out! Get out! 

I turned around, groping in my back pocket for the pipe wrench that was no longer there, 
and now my breakfast was a hard hot ball inside my guts. But I wasn’t afraid, not even 
when she wasn’t there. I’ve read too many books. 




Chapter 03 


I stopped in the bathroom to take a whiz and eat some Ritz crackers. I always carry some 
Ritz crackers in a Baggie. When your stomach’s bad, a few crackers can do wonders. One 
hundred thousand pregnant women can’t be wrong. I was thinking about Sandra Cross, 
whose response in class a few minutes ago had been not bad, but also not the end. I was 
thinking about how she lost her buttons. She was always losing them-off blouses, off 
skirts, and the one time I had taken her to a school dance, she had lost the button off the 
top of her Wranglers and they had almost fallen down. Before she figured out what was 
happening, the zipper on the front of her jeans had come halfway unzipped, showing a V 
of flat white panties that was blackly exciting. Those panties were tight, white, and 
spotless. They were immaculate. They lay against her lower belly with sweet snugness and 
made little ripples while she moved her body to the beat ... until she realized what was 
going on and dashed for the girls’ room. Leaving me with a memory of the Perfect Pair of 
Panties. Sandra was a Nice Girl, and if I had never known it before, I sure-God knew it 
then, because we all know that the Nice Girls wear the white panties. None of that New 
York shit is going down in Placerville, Maine. 

But Mr. Denver kept creeping in, pushing away Sandra and her pristine panties. You 
can’t stop your mind; the damn thing just keeps right on going. All the same, I felt a great 
deal of sympathy for Sandy, even though she was never going to figure out just what the 
quadratic equation was all about. If Mr. Denver and Mr. Grace decided to send me to 
Greenmantle, I might never see Sandy again. And that would be too bad. 

I got up from the hopper, dusted the cracker crumbs down into the bowl, and flushed it. 
High-school toilets are all the same; they sound like 747s taking off. I’ve always hated 
pushing that handle. It makes you sure that the sound is clearly audible in the adjacent 
classroom and that everybody is thinking: Well, there goes another load. I’ve always 
thought a man should be alone with what my mother insisted I call lemonade and 
chocolate when I was a little kid. The bathroom should be a confessional sort of place. But 
they foil you. They always foil you. You can’t even blow your nose and keep it a secret. 
Someone’s always got to know, someone’s always got to peek. People like Mr. Denver and 
Mr. Grace even get paid for it. 

But by then the bathroom door was wheezing shut behind me and I was in the hall again. 
I paused, looking around. The only sound was the sleepy hive drone that means it’s 
Wednesday again, Wednesday morning, ten past nine, everyone caught for another day in 
the splendid sticky web of Mother Education. 


I went back into the bathroom and took out my Flair. I was going to write something 
witty on the wall like SANDRA CROSS WEARS WHITE UNDERPANTS, and then I 
caught sight of my face in the mirror. There were bruised half-moons under my eyes, 
which looked wide and white and stary. The nostrils were half-flared and ugly. The mouth 
was a white, twisted line. 



I Wrote EAT SHIT On the wall until the pen suddenly snapped in my straining fingers. It 
dropped on the floor and I kicked it. 

There was a sound behind me. I didn’t turn around. I closed my eyes and breathed 
slowly and deeply until I had myself under control. Then I went upstairs. 



Chapter 04 


The administration offices of Placerville High are on the third floor, along with the study 
hall, the library, and Room 300, which is the typing room. When you push through the 
door from the stairs, the first thing you hear is that steady clickety-clack. The only time it 
lets up is when the bell changes the classes or when Mrs. Green has something to say. I 
guess she usually doesn’t say much, because the typewriters hardly ever stop. There are 
thirty of them in there, a battle-scarred platoon of gray Underwoods. They have them 
marked with numbers so you know which one is yours. The sound never stops, clickety- 
clack, clickety-clack, from September to June. I’ll always associate that sound with 
waiting in the outer office of the admin offices for Mr. Denver or Mr. Grace, the original 
dipso-duo. It got to be a lot like those jungle movies where the hero and his safari are 
pushing deep into darkest Africa, and the hero says: “Why don’t they stop those blasted 
drums?” And when the blasted drums stop he regards the shadowy, rustling foliage and 
says: “I don’t like it. It’s too quiet.” 

I had gotten to the office late just so Mr. Denver would be ready to see me, but the 
receptionist, Miss Marble, only smiled and said, “Sit down, Charlie. Mr. Denver will be 
right with you. “ 

So I sat down outside the slatted railing, folded my hands, and waited for Mr. Denver to 
be right with me. And who should be in the other chair but one of my father’s good 
friends, AI Lathrop. He was giving me the old slick-eye, too, I can tell you. He had a 
briefcase on his lap and a bunch of sample textbooks beside him. I had never seen him in a 
suit before. He and my father were a couple of mighty hunters. Slayers of the fearsome 
sharp-toothed deer and the killer partridge. I had been on a hunting trip once with my 
father and Al and a couple of my father’s other friends. Part of Dad’s never-ending 
campaign to Make a Man Out of My Son. 

“Hi, there! ” I said, and gave him a big shiteating grin. And I could tell from the way he 
jumped that he knew all about me. 

“Uh, hi, uh, Charlie. ” He glanced quickly at Miss Marble, but she was going over 
attendance lists with Mrs. Venson from next door. No help there. He was all alone with 
Carl Decker’s psychotic son, the fellow who had nearly killed the chemistry-physics 
teacher. 

“Sales trip, huh?” I asked him. 

“Yeah, that’s right. ” He grinned as best he could. “Just out there selling the old books.” 

“Really crushing the competition, huh?” 

He jumped again. “Well, you win some, you lose some, you know, Charlie.” 

Yeah, I knew that. All at once I didn’t want to put the needle in him anymore. He was 
forty and getting bald and there were crocodile purses under his eyes. He went from 
school to school in a Buick station wagon loaded with textbooks and he went hunting for a 
week in November every year with my father and my father’s friends, up in the Allagash. 
And one year I had gone with them. I had been nine, and I woke up and they had been 



drunk and they had scared me. That was all. But this man was no ogre. He was just forty- 
baldish and trying to make a buck. And if I had heard him saying he would murder his 
wife, that was just talk. After all, I was the one with blood on my hands. 

But I didn’t like the way his eyes were darting around, and for a moment just a moment- 
I could have grabbed his windpipe between my hands and yanked his face up to mine and 
screamed into it: You and my father and all your friends, you should all have to go in 
there with me, you should all have to go to Greenmantle with me, because you’re all in it, 
you’re all in it, you’re all a part of this! 

Instead I sat and watched him sweat and thought about old times. 



Chapter 05 


I came awake with a jerk out of a nightmare I hadn’t had for a long time; a dream where 
I was in some dark blind alley and something was coming for me, some dark hunched 
monster that creaked and dragged itself along ... a monster that would drive me insane if I 
saw it. Bad dream. I hadn’t had it since I was a little kid, and I was a big kid now. Nine 
years old. 

At first I didn’t know where I was, except it sure wasn’t my bedroom at home. It seemed 
too close, and it smelled different. I was cold and cramped, and I had to take a whiz 
something awful. 

There was a harsh burst of laughter that made me jerk in my bed-except it wasn’t a bed, 
it was a bag. 

“So she’s some kind of fucking bag,” A1 Lathrop said from beyond the canvas wall, 

“but fucking’s the operant word there.” 

Camping, I was camping with my dad and his friends. I hadn’t wanted to come. 

“Yeah, but how do you git it up, Al? That’s what I want to know. ” That was Scotty 
Norwiss, another one of Dad’s friends. His voice was slurred and furry, and I started to 
feel afraid again. They were drunk. 

“I just turn off the lights and pretend I’m with Carl Decker’s wife,” Al said, and there 
was another bellow of laughter that made me cringe and jerk in my sleeping bag. Oh, God, 
I needed to whiz piss make lemonade whatever you wanted to call it. But I didn’t want to 
go out there while they were drinking and talking. 

I turned to the tent wall and discovered I could see them. They were between the tent 
and the campfire, and their shadows, tall and alien-looking, were cast on the canvas. It was 
like watching a magic lantern show. I watched the shadow-bottle go from one shadow- 
hand to the next. 

“You know what I’d do if I caught you with my wife?” My dad asked Al. 

“Probably ask if I needed any help,” Al said, and there was another burst of laughter. 

The elongated shadow-heads on the tent wall bobbed up and down, back and forth, with 
insectile glee. They didn’t look like people at all. They looked like a bunch of talking 
praying mantises, and I was afraid. 

“No, seriously,” my dad said. “Seriously. You know what I’d do if I caught somebody 
with my wife?” 

“What, Carl?” That was Randy Earl. 

“You see this?” 

A new shadow on the canvas. My father’s hunting knife, the one he carried out in the 
woods, the one I later saw him gut a deer with, slamming it into the deer’s guts to the hilt 
and then ripping upward, the muscles in his forearm bulging, spilling out green and 
steaming intestines onto a carpet of needles and moss. The firelight and the angle of the 



canvas turned the hunting knife into a spear. 

“You see this son of a bitch? I catch some guy with my wife, I’d whip him over on his 
back and cut off his accessories.” 

“He’d pee sitting down to the end of his days, right, Carl?” That was Hubie Levesque, 
the guide. I pulled my knees up to my chest and hugged them. I’ve never had to go to the 
bathroom so bad in my life, before or since. 

“You’re goddamn right,” Carl Decker, my sterling Dad, said. 

“Wha’ about the woman in the case, Carl?” A1 Lathrop asked. He was very drunk. I 
could even tell which shadow was his. He was rocking back and forth as if he was sitting 
in a rowboat instead of on a log by the campfire. “Thass what I wanna know. What do you 
do about a woman who less-lets-someone in the back door? Huh?” 

The hunting knife that had turned into a spear moved slowly back and forth. My father 
said, “The Cherokees used to slit their noses. The idea was to put a cunt right up on their 
faces so everyone in the tribe could see what part of them got them in trouble.” 

My hands left my knees and slipped down to my crotch. I cupped my testicles and 
looked at the shadow of my father’s hunting knife moving slowly back and forth. There 
were terrible cramps in my belly. I was going to whiz in my sleeping bag if I didn’t hurry 
up and go. 

“Slit their noses, huh?” Randy said. “That’s pretty goddamn good. If they still did that, 
half the women in Placerville would have a snatch at both ends. “ 

“Not my wife,” my father said very quietly, and now the slur in his voice was gone, and 
the laughter at Randy’s joke stopped in mid-roar. 

“No, ‘course not, Carl,” Randy said uncomfortably. “Hey, shit. Have a drink. “ 

My father’s shadow tipped the bottle back. 

“I wun’t slit her nose,” A1 Lathrop said. “I’d blow her goddamn cheatin’ head off. “ 

“There you go,” Hubie said. “I’ll drink to it.” 

I couldn’t hold it anymore. I squirmed out of the sleeping bag and felt the cold October 
air bite into my body, which was naked except for a pair of shorts. It seemed like my cock 
wanted to shrivel right back into my body. And the one thing that kept going around and 
around in my mind-I was still partly asleep, I guess, and the whole conversation had 
seemed like a dream, maybe a continuation of the creaking monster in the alley-was that 
when I was smaller, I used to get into my mom’s bed after Dad had put on his uniform and 
gone off to work in Portland, I used to sleep beside her for an hour before breakfast. 

Dark, fear, firelight, shadows like praying mantises. I didn’t want to be out in these 
woods seventy miles from the nearest town with these drunk men. I wanted my mother. 

I came out through the tent flap, and my father turned toward me. The hunting knife was 
still in his hand. He looked at me, and I looked at him. I’ve never forgotten that my dad 
with a reddish beard stubble on his face and a hunting cap cocked on his head and that 
hunting knife in his hand. All the conversation stopped. Maybe they were wondering how 



much I had heard. Maybe they were even ashamed. 

“What the hell do you want?” my dad asked, sheathing the knife. 

“Give him a drink, Carl,” Randy said, and there was a roar of laughter. A1 laughed so 
hard he fell over. He was pretty drunk. 

“I gotta whiz,” I said. 

“Then go do it, for Christ’s sake,” my dad said. 

I went over in the grove and tried to whiz. For a long time it wouldn’t come out. It was 
like a hot soft ball of lead in my lower belly. I had nothing but a fingernail’s length of 
penis-the cold had really shriveled it. At last it did come, in a great steaming flood, and 
when it was all out of me, I went back into the tent and got in my sleeping bag. None of 
them looked at me. They were talking about the war. They had all been in the war. 


My dad got his deer three days later, on the last day of the trip. I was with him. He got it 
perfectly, in the bunch of muscle between neck and shoulder, and the buck went down in a 
heap, all grace gone. 

We went over to it. My father was smiling, happy. He had unsheathed his knife. I knew 
what was going to happen, and I knew I was going to be sick, and I couldn’t help any of it. 
He planted a foot on either side of the buck and pulled one of its legs back and shoved the 
knife in. One quick upward rip, and its guts spilled out on the forest floor, and I turned 
around and heaved up my breakfast. 

When I turned back to him, he was looking at me. He never said anything, but I could 
read the contempt and disappointment in his eyes. I had seen it there often enough. I didn’t 
say anything either. But if I had been able to, I would have said: It isn’t what you think. 

That was the first and last time I ever went hunting with my dad. 



Chapter 06 


A1 Lathrop was still thumbing through his textbook samples and pretending he was too 
busy to talk to me when the intercom on Miss Marble’s desk buzzed, and she smiled at me 
as if we had a great and sexy secret. “You can go in now, Charlie. “ 

I got up. “Sell those textbooks, Al.” 

He gave me a quick, nervous, insincere smile. “I sure will, uh, Charlie.” 

I went through the slatted gate, past the big safe set into the wall on the right and Miss 
Marble’s cluttered desk on the left. Straight ahead was a door with a frosted glass pane. 
THOMAS DENVER PRINCIPAL was lettered on the glass. I walked in. 

Mr. Denver was looking at The Bugle, the school rag. He was a tall, cadaverous man 
whg looked something like John Carradine. He was bald and skinny. His hands were long 
and full of knuckles. His tie was pulled down, and the top button of his shirt was undone. 
The skin on his throat looked grizzled and irritated from overshaving. 

“Sit down, Charlie.” 

I sat down and folded my hands. I’m a great old hand-folder. It’s a trick I picked up from 
my father. Through the window behind Mr. Denver I could see the lawn, but not the 
fearless way it grew right up to the building. I was too high, and it was too bad. It might 
have helped, like a night-light when you are small. 

Mr. Denver put The Bugle down and leaned back in his chair. “Kind of hard to see that 
way, isn’t it?” He grunted. Mr. Denver was a crackerjack grunter. If there was a National 
Grunting Bee, I would put all my money on Mr. Denver. I brushed my hair away from my 
eyes. 

There was a picture of Mr. Denver’s family on his desk, which was even more cluttered 
than Miss Marble’s. The family looked well-fed and well-adjusted. His wife was sort of 
porky, but the two kids were as cute as buttons and didn’t look a bit like John Carradine. 
Two little girls, both blond. 

“Don Grace has finished his report, and I’ve had it since last Thursday, considering his 
conclusions and his recommendations as carefully as I can. We all appreciate the 
seriousness of this matter, and I’ve taken the liberty of discussing the whole thing with 
John Carlson, also. “ 

“How is he?” I asked. 

“Pretty well. He’ll be back in a month, I should think.” 

“Well, that’s something.” 

“It is?” He blinked at me very quickly, the way lizards do. 

“I didn’t kill him. That’s something.” 

“Yes.” Mr. Denver looked at me steadily. “Do you wish you had?” 

“No.” 



He leaned forward, drew his chair up to his desk, looked at me, shook his head, and 
began, “I’m very puzzled when I have to speak the way I’m about to speak to you, 

Charlie. Puzzled and sad. I’ve been in the kid business since 1947, and I still can’t 
understand these things. I feel what I have to say to you is right and necessary, but it also 
makes me unhappy. Because I still can’t understand why a thing like this happens. In 1959 
we had a very bright boy here who beat a junior-high-school girl quite badly with a 
baseball bat. Eventually we had to send him to South Portland Correctional Institute. All 
he could say was that she wouldn’t go out with him. Then he would smile. ” Mr. Denver 
shook his head. 

“Don’t bother. “ 

“What?” 

“Don’t bother trying to understand. Don’t lose any sleep over it. “ 

“But why, Charlie? Why did you do that? My God, he was on an operating table for 
nearly four hours-” 

“Why is Mr. Grace’s question, ” I said. “He’s the school shrink. You, you only ask it 
because it makes a nice lead-in to your sermon. I don’t want to listen to any more 
sermons. They don’t mean shit to me. It’s over. He was going to live or die. He lived. I’m 
glad. You do what you have to do. What you and Mr. Grace decided to do. But don’t you 
try to understand me.” 

“Charlie, understanding is part of my job.” 

“But helping you do your job isn’t part of mine,” I said. “So let me tell you one thing. To 
sort of help open the lines of communication, okay?” 

“Okay...” 

I held my hands tightly in my lap. They were trembling. “I’m sick of you and Mr. Grace 
and all the rest of you. You used to make me afraid and you still make me afraid but now 
you make me tired too, and I’ve decided I don’t have to put up with that. The way I am, I 
can’t put up with that. What you think doesn’t mean anything to me. You’re not qualified 
to deal with me. So just stand back. I’m warning you. You’re not qualified. “ 

My voice had risen to a trembling near-shout. 

Mr. Denver sighed. 

“So you may think, Charlie. But the laws of the state say otherwise. After having read 
Mr. Grace’s report, I think I agree with him that you don’t understand yourself or the 
consequences of what you did in Mr. Carlson’s classroom. You are disturbed, Charlie. “ 

You are disturbed, Charlie. 

The Cherokees used to slit their noses ... so everyone in the tribe could see what part of 
them got them in trouble. 

The words echoed greenly in my head, as if at great depths. They were shark words at 
deep fathoms, jaws words come to gobble me. Words with teeth and eyes. 

This is where I started to get it on. I knew it, because the same thing that happened just 



before I gave Mr. Carlson the business was happening now. My hands stopped shaking. 

My stomach flutters subsided, and my whole middle felt cool and calm. I felt detached, 
not only from Mr. Denver and his overshaved neck, but from myself. I could almost float. 

Mr. Denver had gone on, something about proper counseling and psychiatric help, but I 
interrupted him. “Mr. Man, you can go straight to hell.” 

He stopped and put down the paper he had been looking at so he wouldn’t have to look 
at me. Something from my file, no doubt. The almighty file. The Great American File. 

“What?” he said. 

“In hell. Judge not, lest ye be judged. Any insanity in your family, Mr. Denver?” 

I’ll discuss this with you, Charlie,” he said tightly. “I won’t engage in-” 

”... immoral sex practices,” I finished for him. “Just you and me, okay? First one to 
jack off wins the Putnam Good Fellowship Award. Fill yore hand, pardner. Get Mr. Grace 
in here, that’s even better. We’ll have a circle jerk.” 

“Wh- 

“Don’t you get the message? You have to pull it out sometime, right? You owe it to 
yourself, right? Everybody has to get it on, everybody has to have someone to jack off on. 
You’ve already set yourself up as Judge of What’s Right for Me. Devils. Demon 
possession. Why did I hit dat Til girl wit dat ball bat, Lawd, Lawd? De debbil made me do 
it, and I’m so saw-ry. Why don’t you admit it? You get a kick out of peddling my flesh. 

I’m the best thing that’s happened to you since 1959. “ 

He was gawping at me openly. I had him by the short hair, knew it, was savagely proud 
of it. On the one hand, he wanted to humor me, go along with me, because after all, isn’t 
that what you do with disturbed people? On the other hand, he was in the kid business, just 
like he told me, and Rule One in the kid business is: Don’t Let 'Em Give You No Lip-be 
fast with the command and the snappy comeback. 

“Charlie-” 

“Don’t bother. I’m trying to tell you I’m tired of being masturbated on. Be a man, for 
God’s sake, Mr. Denver. And if you can’t be a man, at least pull up your pants and be a 
principal. “ 

“Shut up,” he grunted. His face had gone bright red. “You’re just pretty damn lucky you 
live in a progressive state and go to a progressive school, young man. You know where 
you’d be otherwise? Peddling your papers in a reformatory somewhere, serving a term for 
criminal assault. I’m not sure you don’t belong there anyway. You-' 

“Thank you,” I said. 

He stared at me, his angry blue eyes fixed on mine. 

“For treating me like a human being even if I had to piss you off to do it. That’s real 
progress. ” I crossed my legs, being nonchalant. “Want to talk about the panty raids you 
made the scene at while you were at Big U learning the kid business?” 

“Your mouth is filthy,” he said deliberately. “And so is your mind.” 



“Fuck you,” I said, and laughed at him. 

He went an even deeper shade of scarlet and stood up. He reached slowly over the desk, 
slowly, slowly, as if he needed oiling, and bunched the shoulder of my shirt in his hand. 
“You show some respect,” he said. He had really blown his cool and was not even 
bothering to use that really first-class grunt. “You rotten little punk, you show me some 
respect. “ 

“I could show you my ass and you’d kiss it,” I said. “Go on and tell me about the panty 
raids. You’ll feel better. Throw us your panties! Throw us your panties! “ 

He let go of me, holding his hand away from his body as if a rabid dog had just pooped 
on it. “Get out,” he said hoarsely. “Get your books, turn them in here, and then get out. 
Your expulsion and transfer to Greenmantle Academy is effective as of Monday. I’ll talk to 
your parents on the telephone. Now get out. I don’t want to have to look at you.” 

I got up, unbuttoned the two bottom buttons on my shirt, pulled the tail out on one side, 
and unzipped my fly. Before he could move, I tore open the door and staggered into the 
outer office. Miss Marble and A1 Lathrop were conferring at her desk, and they both 
looked up and winced when they saw me. They had obviously both been playing the great 
American parlor game of We Don’t Really Hear Them, Do We? 

“You better get to him,” I panted. “We were sitting there talking about panty raids and he 
just jumped over his desk and tried to rape me. “ 

I’d pushed him over the edge, no mean feat, considering he’d been in the kid business 
for twenty-nine years and was probably only ten away from getting his gold key to the 
downstairs crapper. He lunged at me through the door; I danced away from him and he 
stood there looking furious, silly, and guilty all at once. 

“Get somebody to take care of him,” I said. “He’ll be sweeter after he gets it out of his 
system. ” I looked at Mr. Denver, winked, and whispered, “Throw us your panties, right?” 

Then I pushed out through the slatted rail and walked slowly out the office door, 
buttoning my shirt and tucking it in, zipping my fly. There was plenty of time for him to 
say something, but he didn’t say a word. 

That’s when it really got rolling, because all at once I knew he couldn’t say a word. He 
was great at announcing the day’s hot lunch over the intercom, but this was a different 
thing joyously different. I had confronted him with exactly what he said was wrong with 
me, and he hadn’t been able to cope with that. Maybe he expected us to smile and shake 
hands and conclude my seven-and-one-half-semester stay at Placerville High with a 
literary critique of The Bugle. But in spite of everything, Mr. Carlson and all the rest, he 
hadn’t really expected any irrational act. Those things were all meant for the closet, rolled 
up beside those nasty magazines you never show your wife. He was standing back there, 
vocal cords frozen, not a word left in his mind to say. None of his instructors in Dealing 
with the Disturbed Child, EdB-211, had ever told him he might someday have to deal with 
a student who would attack him on a personal level. 

And pretty quick he was going to be mad. That made him dangerous. Who knew better 
than me? I was going to have to protect myself. I was ready, and had been ever since I 



decided that people might-just might, mind you-be following me around and checking up. 
I gave him every chance. 

I waited for him to charge out and grab me, all the way to the staircase. I didn’t want 
salvation. I was either past that point or never reached it. All I wanted was recognition ... 
or maybe for someone to draw a yellow plague circle around my feet. 

He didn’t come out. 

And when he didn’t, I went ahead and got it on. 



Chapter 07 


I went down the staircase whistling; I felt wonderful. Things happen that way 
sometimes. When everything is at its worst, your mind just throws it all into the 
wastebasket and goes to Florida for a little while. There is a sudden electric what-the-hell 
glow as you stand there looking back over your shoulder at the bridge you just burned 
down. 

A girl I didn’t know passed me on the second-floor landing, a pimply, ugly girl wearing 
big horn-rimmed glasses and carrying a clutch of secretarial-type books. On impulse I 
turned around and looked after her. Yes; yes. From the back she might have been Miss 
America. It was wonderful. 



Chapter 08 


The first-floor hall was deserted. Not a soul coming or going. The only sound was the 
hive drone, the sound that makes all the schoolhouses the same, modern and glass-walled 
or ancient and stinking of floor varnish. Lockers stood in silent sentinel rows, with a break 
here and there to make room for a drinking fountain or a classroom door. 

Algebra II was in Room 16, but my locker was at the other end of the hall. I walked 
down to it and regarded it. 

My locker. It said so: CHARLES DECKER printed neatly in my hand on a strip of 
school Con-Tact paper. Each September, during the first home-room period, came the 
handing out of the blank Con-Tact strips. We lettered carefully, and during the two-minute 
break between home room and the first class of the new year, we pasted them on. The 
ritual was as old and as holy as First Communion. On the first day of my sophomore year, 
Joe McKennedy walked up to me through the crowded hall with his Con-Tact strip pasted 
on his forehead and a big shit-eating grin pasted on his mouth. Hundreds of horrified 
freshmen, each with a little yellow name tag pinned on his or her shirt or blouse, turned to 
look at this sacrilege. I almost broke my balls laughing. Of course he got a detention for it, 
but it made my day. When I think back on it, I guess it made my year. 

And there I was, right between ROSANNE DEBBINS and CARLA DENCH, who 
doused herself in rosewater every morning, which had been no great help in keeping my 
breakfast where it belonged during the last semester. 

Ah, but all that was behind me now. 

Gray locker, five feet high, padlocked. The padlocks were handed out at the beginning 
of the year along with the Con-Tact strips. Titus, the padlock proclaimed itself. Lock me, 
unlock me. I am Titus, the Helpful Padlock. 

“Titus, you old cuffer,” I whispered. “Titus, you old cock-knocker.” 

I reached for Titus, and it seemed to me that my hand stretched to it across a thousand 
miles, a hand on the end of a plastic arm that elongated painlessly and nervelessly. The 
numbered surface of Titus’ black face looked at me blandly, not condemning but certainly 
not approving, no, not that, and I shut my eyes for a moment. My body wrenched through 
a shudder, pulled by invisible, involuntary, opposing hands. 

And when I opened my eyes again, Titus was in my grasp. The chasm had closed. 

The combinations on high-school locks are simple. Mine was six to the left, thirty right, 
and two turns back to zero. Titus was known more for his strength than his intellect. The 
lock snapped up, and I had him in my hand. I clutched him tightly, making no move to 
open the locker door. 

Up the hall, Mr. Johnson was saying: ”... and the Hessians, who were paid mercenaries, 
weren’t any too anxious to fight, especially in a countryside where the opportunities for 
plunder over and above the agreed-upon wages ... “ 

“Hessian,” I whispered to Titus. I carried him down to the first wastebasket and dropped 



him in. He looked up at me innocently from a litter of discarded homework papers and old 
sandwich bags. 

”... but remember that the Hessians, as far as the Continental Army knew, were 
formidable German killing machines ... ‘ 

I bent down, picked him up, and put him in my breast pocket, where he made a bulge 
about the size of a pack of cigarettes. 

“Keep it in mind, Titus, you old killing machine,” I said, and went back to my locker. 

I swung it open. Crumpled up in a sweaty ball at the bottom was my gym uniform, old 
lunch bags, candy wrappers, a month-old apple core that was browning nicely, and a pair 
of ratty black sneakers. My red nylon jacket was hung on the coat-hook, and on the shelf 
above that were my textbooks, all but Algebra II. Civics, American Government, French 
Stories and Fables, and Health, that happy Senior gut course, a red, modern book with a 
high-school girl and boy on the cover and the section on venereal disease neatly clipped 
by unanimous vote of the School Committee. I started to get it on beginning with the 
health book, sold to the school by none other than good old A1 Lathrop, I hoped and 
trusted. I took it out, opened it somewhere between “The Building Blocks of Nutrition” 
and “Swimming Rules for Fun and Safety,” and ripped it in two. It came easy. They all 
came easy except for Civics, which was a tough old Silver Burdett text circa 1946.1 threw 
all the pieces into the bottom of the locker. The only thing left up top was my slide rule, 
which I snapped in two, a picture of Raquel Welch taped to the back wall (I let it stay), 
and the box of shells that had been behind my books. 

I picked that up and looked at it. The box had originally held Winchester .22 long-rifle 
shells, but it didn’t anymore. I’d put the other shells in it, the ones from the desk drawer in 
my father’s study. There’s a deer head mounted on the wall in his study, and it stared down 
at me with its glassy too-alive eyes as I took the shells and the gun, but I didn’t let it 
bother me. It wasn’t the one he’d gotten on the hunting trip when I was nine. The pistol 
had been in another drawer, behind a box of business envelopes. I doubt if he even 
remembered it was still there. And as a matter of fact, it wasn’t, not anymore. Now it was 
in the pocket of my jacket. I took it out and shoved it into my belt. I didn’t feel much like 
a Hessian. I felt like Wild Bill Hickok. 

I put the shells in my pants pocket and took out my lighter. It was one of those Scripto 
see-through jobs. I don’t smoke myself, but the lighter had kind of caught my fancy. I 
snapped a light to it, squatted, and set the crap in the bottom of my locker on fire. 

The flames licked up greedily from my gym trunks to the lunch bags and candy 
wrappers to the ruins of my books, carrying a sweaty, athletic smell up to me. 

Then, figuring that I had gotten it on as much as I could by myself, I shut the locker 
door. There were little vents just above where my name was Con-Tact-papered on, and 
through them I could hear the flames whooshing upward. In a minute little orange flecks 
were glaring in the darkness beyond the vents, and the gray locker paint started to crack 
and peel. 

A kid came out of Mr. Johnson’s room carrying a green bathroom pass. He looked at the 



smoke belching merrily out of the vents in my locker, looked at me, and hurried down to 
the bathroom. I don’t think he saw the pistol. He wasn’t hurrying that fast. 

I started down to Room 16.1 paused just as I got there, my hand on the doorknob, 
looking back. The smoke was really pouring out of the vents now, and a dark, sooty stain 
was spreading up the front of my locker. The Con-Tact paper had turned brown. You 
couldn’t see the letters that made my name anymore. 

I don’t think there was anything in my brain fight then except the usual background 
static-the kind~you get on your radio when it’s turned up all the way and tuned to no 
station at all. My brain had checked to the power, so to speak; the little guy wearing the 
Napoleon hat inside was showing aces and betting them. 

I turned back to Room 16 and opened the door. I was hoping, but I didn’t know what. 



Chapter 09 


”... So you understand that when we increase the number of variables, the axioms 
themselves never change. For example-' 

Mrs. Underwood looked up alertly, pushing her harlequin glasses up on her nose. “Do 
you have an office pass, Mr. Decker?” 

“Yes,” I said, and took the pistol out of my belt. I wasn’t even sure it was loaded until it 
went off. I shot her in the head. Mrs. Underwood never knew what hit her, I’m sure. She 
fell sideways onto her desk and then rolled onto the floor, and that expectant expression 
never left her face. 



Chapter 10 


Sanity: 

You can go through your whole life telling yourself that life is logical, life is prosaic, life 
is sane. Above all, sane. And I think it is. I’ve had a lot of time to think about that. And 
what I keep coming back to is Mrs. Underwood’s dying declaration: So you understand 
that when we increase the number of variables, the axioms themselves never change. 

I really believe that. 

I think; therefore I am. There are hairs on my face; therefore I shave. My wife and child 
have been critically injured in a car crash; therefore I pray. It’s all logical, it’s all sane. We 
live in the best of all possible worlds, so hand me a Kent for my left, a Bud for my right, 
turn on Starsky and Hutch, and listen to that soft, harmonious note that is the universe 
turning smoothly on its celestial gyros. Logic and sanity. Like Coca-Cola, it’s the real 
thing. 

But as Warner Brothers, John D. MacDonald, and Long Island Dragway know so well, 
there’s a Mr. Hyde for every happy Jekyll face, a dark face on the other side of the mirror. 
The brain behind that face never heard of razors, prayers, or the logic of the universe. You 
turn the mirror sideways and see your face reflected with a sinister left-hand twist, half 
mad and half sane. The astronomers call that line between light and dark the terminator. 

The other side says that the universe has all the logic of a little kid in a Halloween 
cowboy suit with his guts and his trick-or-treat candy spread all over a mile of Interstate 
95. This is the logic of napalm, paranoia, suitcase bombs carried by happy Arabs, random 
carcinoma. This logic eats itself. It says life is a monkey on a stick, it says life spins as 
hysterically and erratically as the penny you flick to see who buys lunch. 

No one looks at that side unless they have to, and I can understand that. You look at it if 
you hitch a ride with a drunk in a GTO who puts it up to one-ten and starts blubbering 
about how his wife turned him out; you look at it if some guy decides to drive across 
Indiana shooting kids on bicycles; you look at it if your sister says “I’m going down to the 
store for a minute, big guy” and then gets killed in a stickup. You look at it when you hear 
your dad talking about slitting your mom’s nose. 

It’s a roulette wheel, but anybody who says the game is rigged is whining. No matter 
how many numbers there are, the principle of that little white jittering ball never changes. 
Don’t say it’s crazy. It’s all so cool and sane. 

And all that weirdness isn’t just going on outside. It’s in you too, right now, growing in 
the dark like magic mushrooms. Call it the Thing in the Cellar. Call it the Blow Lunch 
Factor. Call it the Loony Tunes File. I think of it as my private dinosaur, huge, slimy, and 
mindless, stumbling around in the stinking swamp of my subconscious, never finding a 
tarpit big enough to hold it. 

But that’s me, and I started to tell you about them, those bright college-bound students 
that, metaphorically speaking, walked down to the store to get milk and ended up in the 
middle of an armed robbery. I’m a documented case, routine grist for the newspaper mill. 



A thousand newsboys hawked me on a thousand street corners. I had fifty seconds on 
Chancellor-Brinkley and a column and a half in Time. And I stand here before you 
(metaphorically speaking, again) and tell you I’m perfectly sane. I do have one slightly 
crooked wheel upstairs, but everything else is ticking along just four-o, thank you very 
much. 

So, them. How do you understand them ? We have to discuss that, don’t we? 

“Do you have an office pass, Mr. Decker?” she asked me. 

“Yes,” I said, and took the pistol out of my belt. I wasn’t even sure it was loaded until it 
went off. I shot her in the head. Mrs. Underwood never knew what hit her, I’m sure. She 
fell sideways onto her desk and then rolled onto the floor, and that expectant expression 
never left her face. 

I’m the sane one: I’m the croupier, I’m the guy who spins the ball against the spin of the 
wheel. The guy who lays his money on odd/even, the girl who lays her money on 
black/red ... what about them ? 

There isn’t any division of time to express the marrow of our lives, the time between the 
explosion of lead from the muzzle and the meat impact, between the impact and the 
darkness. There’s only barren instant replay that shows nothing new. 

I shot her; she fell; and there was an indescribable moment of silence, an infinite 
duration of time, and we all stepped back, watching the ball go around and around, 
ticking, bouncing, lighting for an instant, going on, heads and tails, red and black, odd and 
even. 

I think that moment ended. I really do. But sometimes, in the dark, I think that hideous 
random moment is still going on, that the wheel is even yet in spin, and I dreamed all the 
rest. 

What must it be like for a suicide coming down from a high ledge? I’m sure it must be a 
very sane feeling. That’s probably why they scream all the way down. 



Chapter 11 


If someone had screamed something melodramatic at that precise moment, something 
like Oh, my God, he’s going to kill us all! it would have been over right there. They would 
have bolted like sheep, and somebody aggressive like Dick Keene would have belted me 
over the head with his algebra book, thereby earning a key to the city and the Good 
Citizenship Award. 

But nobody said a word. They sat in utter stunned silence, looking at me attentively, as if 
I had just announced that I was going to tell them how they could all get passes to the 
Placerville Drive-In this Friday night. 

I shut the classroom door, crossed the room, and sat behind the big desk. My legs 
weren’t so good. I was almost to the point of sit down or fall down. I had to push Mrs. 
Underwood’s feet out of the way to get my own feet into the kneehole. I put the pistol 
down on her green blotter, shut her algebra book, and put it with the others that were 
stacked neatly on the desk’s corner. 

That was when Irma Bates broke the silence with a high, gobbling scream that sounded 
like a young tom turkey getting its neck wrung on the day before Thanksgiving. But it was 
too late; everyone had taken that endless moment to consider the facts of life and death. 
Nobody picked up on her scream, and she stopped, as if ashamed at screaming while 
school was in session, no matter how great the provocation. Somebody cleared his throat. 
Somebody in the back of the room said “Hum!” in a mildly judicial tone. And John “Pig 
Pen” Dano slithered quietly out of his seat and slumped to the floor in a dead faint. 

They looked up at me from the trough of shock. 

“This,” I said pleasantly, “is known as getting it on.” 

Footsteps pounded down the hall, and somebody asked somebody else if something had 
exploded in the chemistry lab. While somebody else was saying he didn’t know, the fire 
alarm went off stridently. Half the kids in the class started to get up automatically. 

“That’s all right,” I said. “It’s just my locker. On fire. I set it on fire, that is. Sit down.” 

The ones that had started to get up sat down obediently. I looked for Sandra Cross. She 
was in the third row, fourth seat, and she did not seem afraid. She looked like what she 
was. An intensely exciting Good Girl. 

Lines of students were filing out onto the grass; I could see them through the windows. 
The squirrel was gone, though. Squirrels make lousy innocent bystanders. 

The door was snatched open, and I picked up the gun. Mr. Vance poked his head in. 

“Fire alarm,” he said. “Everybody ... Where’s Mrs. Underwood?” 

“Get out,” I said. 

He stared at me. He was a very porky man, and his hair was neatly crew cut. It looked as 
if some landscape artist had trimmed it carefully with hedge clippers. “What? What did 
you say?” 



“Out.” I shot at him and missed. The bullet whined off the upper edge of the door, 
chipping wood splinters. 

“Jesus,” somebody in the front row said mildly. 

Mr. Vance didn’t know what was happening. I don’t think any of them did. It all 
reminded me of an article I read about the last big earthquake in California. It was about a 
woman who was wandering from room to room while her house was being shaken to 
pieces all around her, yelling to her husband to please unplug the fan. 

Mr. Vance decided to go back to the beginning. “There’s a fire in the building. Please-” 

“Charlie’s got a gun, Mr. Vance, ” Mike Gavin said in a discussing-the-weather tone. “I 
think you better-” 

The second bullet caught him in the throat. His flesh spread liquidly like water spreads 
when you throw a rock in it. He walked backward into the hall, scratching at his throat, 
and fell over. 

Irma Bates screamed again, but again she had no takers. If it had been Carol Granger, 
there would have been imitators galore, but who wanted to be in concert with poor old 
Irma Bates? She didn’t even have a boyfriend. Besides, everyone was too busy peeking at 
Mr. Vance, whose scratching motions were slowing down. 

“Ted,” I said to Ted Jones, who sat closest to the door. “Shut that and lock it.- 

“What do you think you’re doing?” Ted asked. He was looking at me with a kind of 
scared and scornful distaste. 

“I don’t know all the details just yet,” I said. “But shut the door and lock it, okay?” 

Down the hall someone was yelling: “It’s in a locker! It’s in a Vance’s had a heart attack! 
Get some water! Get... “ 

Ted Jones got up, shut the door, and locked it. He was a tall boy wearing wash-faded 
Levi’s and an army shirt with flap pockets. He looked very fine. I had always admired 
Ted, although he was never part of the circle I traveled in. He drove last year’s Mustang, 
which his father had given him, and didn’t get any parking tickets, either. He combed his 
hair in an out-of-fashion DA, and I bet his was the face that Irma Bates called up in her 
mind when she sneaked a cucumber out of the refrigerator in the wee hours of the night. 
With an all-American name like Ted Jones he couldn’t very well miss, either. His father 
was vice-president of the Placerville Bank and Trust. 

“Now what?” Hannon Jackson asked. He sounded bewildered. 

“Um.” I put the pistol down on the blotter again. “Well, somebody try and bring Pig Pen 
around. He’ll get his shirt dirty. Dirtier, I mean.” 

Sarah Pasterne started to giggle hysterically and clapped her hand over her mouth. 
George Yannick, who sat close to Pig Pen, squatted down beside him and began to pat his 
cheeks. Pig Pen moaned, opened his eyes, rolled them, and said, “He shot Book Bags.” 

There were several hysterical laughs this time. They went off around the room like 
popping corn. Mrs. Underwood had two plastic briefcases with tartan patterns on them, 



which she carried into each class. She had also been known as Two-Gun Sue. 

Pig Pen settled shakily into his seat, rolled his eyes again, and began to cry. 

Somebody pounded up to the door, rattled the knob, and yelled, “Hey! Hey in there!” It 
looked like Mr. Johnson, who had been talking about the Hessians. 1 picked up the pistol 
and put a bullet through the chicken-wired glass. It made a neat little hole beside Mr. 
Johnson’s head, and Mr. Johnson went out of sight like a crash-diving submarine. The 
class (with the possible exception of Ted) watched all the action with close interest, as if 
they had stumbled into a pretty good movie by accident. 

“Somebody in there’s got a gun!” Mr. Johnson yelled. There was a faint bumping sound 
as he crawled away. The fire alarm buzzed hoarsely on and on. 

“Now what?” Harmon Jackson asked again. He was a small boy, usually with a big 
cockeyed grin on his face, but now he looked helpless, all at sea. 

I couldn’t think of an answer to that, so I let it pass. Outside, kids were milling restlessly 
around on the lawn, talking and pointing at Room 16 as the grapevine passed the word 
among them. After a little bit, some teachers-the men teachers-began shooing them back 
toward the gymnasium end of the building. 

In town the fire whistle on the Municipal Building began to scream, rising and falling in 
hysterical cycles. 

“It’s like the end of the world,” Sandra Cross said softly. 

I had no answer for that, either. 



Chapter 12 


No one said anything for maybe five minutes-not until the fire engines got to the high 
school. They looked at me, and I looked at them. Maybe they still could have bolted, and 
they’re still asking me why they didn’t. Why didn’t they cut and run, Charlie? What did 
you do to them? Some of them ask that almost fearfully, as if I had the evil eye. I don’t 
answer them. I don’t answer any questions about what happened that morning in Room 
16. But if I told them anything, it would be that they’ve forgotten what it is to be a kid, to 
live cheek-by-jowl with violence, with the commonplace fistfights in the gym, brawls at 
the PAL hops in Lewiston, beatings on television, murders in the movies. Most of us had 
seen a little girl puke pea soup all over a priest right down at our local drive-in. Old Book 
Bags wasn’t much shakes by comparison. 

I’m not taking on any of those things, hey, I’m in no shape for crusades these days. I’m 
just telling you that American kids labor under a huge life of violence, both real and make- 
believe. Besides, I was kind of interesting: Hey, Charlie Decker went apeshit today, didja 
hear? No! Did he? Yeah. Yeah. I was there. It was just like Bonnie and Clyde, except 
Charlie’s got zitzes and there wasn’t any popcorn. 

I know they thought they’d be all right. That’s part of it. What I wonder about is this: 
Were they hoping I’d get somebody else? 

Another shrieking sound had joined the fire siren, this one getting closer real fast. Not 
the cops. It was that hysterical yodeling note that is all the latest rage in ambulances and 
paramedic vehicles these days. I’ve always thought the day will come when all the disaster 
vehicles will get smart and stop scaring the almighty shit out of everyone they’re coming 
to save. When there’s a fire or an accident or a natural disaster like me, the red vehicles 
will rush to the scene accompanied by the amplified sound of the Darktown Strutters 
playing “Banjo Rag.” Someday. Oh, boy. 



Chapter 13 


Seeing as how it was the school, the town fire department went whole hog. The fire 
chief came first, gunning into the big semicircular school driveway in his blue bubble- 
topped Ford Pinto. Behind him was a hook-and-ladder trailing firemen like battle banners. 
There were two pumpers behind that. 

“You going to let them in?” Jack Goldman asked. 

“The fire’s out there,” I said. “Not in here.” 

“Did you shut ya locka door?” Sylvia Ragan asked. She was a big blond girl with great 
soft cardiganed breasts and gently rotting teeth. 

“Yes. “ 

“Prolly out already, then.” 

Mike Gavin looked at the scurrying firemen and snickered. “Two of 'em just ran into 
each other,” he said. “Holy moly.” 

The two downed firemen untangled themselves, and the whole group was preparing to 
charge into the inferno when two suit-coated figures ran over to them. One was Mr. 
Johnson, the Human Submarine, and the other was Mr. Grace. They were talking hard and 
fast to the fire chief. 

Great rolls of hose with shiny nozzles were being unreeled from the pumpers and 
dragged toward the front doors. The fire chief turned around and yelled, “Hold it! ” They 
stood irresolutely on the lawn, their nozzles gripped and held out before them like comic 
brass phalluses. 

The fire chief was still in conference with Mr. Johnson and Mr. Grace. Mr. Johnson 
pointed at Room 16. Thomas Denver, the Principal with the Amazing Overshaved Neck, 
ran over and joined the discussion. It was starting to look like a pitcher’s mound 
conference in the last half of the ninth. 

“I want to go home!” Irma Bates said wildly. 

“Blow it out,” I said. 

The fire chief had started to gesture toward his knights again, and Mr. Grace shook his 
head angrily and put a hand on his shoulder. He turned to Denver and said something to 
him. Denver nodded and ran toward the main doors. 

The chief was nodding reluctantly. He went back to his car, rummaged in the back seat, 
and came up with a really nice Radio Shack battery-powered bullhorn. I bet they had some 
real tussles back at the fire station about who got to use that. Today the chief was 
obviously pulling rank. He pointed it at the milling students. 

“Please move away from the building. I repeat. Will you please move away from the 
building. Move up to the shoulder of the highway. Move up to the shoulder of the 
highway. We will have buses here to pick you up shortly. School is canceled for-‘ 

Short, bewildered whoop. 



"... for the remainder of the day. Now, please move away from the building.” 

A bunch of teachers-both men and women this time-started herding them up toward the 
road. They were craning and babbling. I looked for Joe McKennedy but didn’t see him 
anywhere. 

“Is it all right to do homework?” Melvin Thomas asked tremblingly. There was a general 
laugh. They seemed surprised to hear it. 

“Go ahead.” I thought for a moment and added: “If you want to smoke, go ahead and do 
it. “ 

A couple of them grabbed for their pockets. Sylvia Ragan, doing her lady-of-the-manor 
bit, fished a battered pack of Camels delicately out of her purse and lit up with leisurely 
elegance. She blew out a plume of smoke and dropped her match on the floor. She 
stretched out her legs, not bothering overmuch with the nuisance of her skirt. She looked 
comfy. 

There had to be more, though. I was getting along pretty well, but there had to be a 
thousand things I wasn’t thinking of. Not that it mattered. 

“If you’ve got a friend you want to sit next to, go ahead and change around. But don’t 
try to rush at me or run out the door, please.” 

A couple of kids changed next to their buddies, walking quickly and softly, but most of 
them just sat quiet. Melvin Thomas had opened his algebra book but couldn’t seem to 
concentrate on it. He was staring at me glassily. 

There was a faint metallic chink! from the upper corner of the room. Somebody had just 
opened the intercom system. 

“Hello,” Denver said. “Hello, Room 16.” 

“Hello,” I said. 

“Who’s that?” 

“Charlie Decker.” 

Long pause. Finally: “What’s going on down there, Decker?” 

I thought it over. “I guess I’m going berserk,” I said. 

An even longer pause. Then, almost rhetorically: “What have you done?” 

I motioned at Ted Jones. He nodded back at me politely. “Mr. Denver?” 

“Who’s that?” 

“Ted Jones, Mr. Denver. Charlie has a gun. He’s holding us hostage. He’s killed Mrs. 
Underwood. And I think he killed Mr. Vance, too.” 

“I’m pretty sure I did,” I said. 

“Oh,” Mr. Denver said. 

Sarah Pasterne giggled again. 

“Ted Jones?” 



“I’m here,” Ted told him. He sounded very competent, Ted did, but at the same time 
distant. Like a first lieutenant who has been to college. You had to admire him. 

“Who is in the classroom besides you and Decker?” 

“Just a sec,” I said. “I’ll call the roll. Hold on.” 

I got Mrs. Underwood’s green attendance book and opened it up. “Period two, right?” 

“Yeah,” Corky said. 

“Okay. Here we go. Irma Bates?” 

“I want to go home! ” Irma screamed defiantly. 

“She’s here,” I said. “Susan Brooks?” 

“Here. “ 

“Nancy Caskin?” 

“Here. “ 

I went through the rest of the roll. There were twenty-five names, and the only absentee 
was Peter Franklin. 

“Has Peter Franklin been shot?” Mr. Denver asked quietly. 

“He’s got the measles,” Don Lordi said. This brought on another attack of the giggles. 
Ted Jones frowned deeply. 

“Decker?” 

“Yes.” 

“Will you let them go?” 

“Not right now,” I said. 

“Why?” There was dreadful concern, a dreadful heaviness in his voice, and for a second 
I almost caught myself feeling sorry for him. I crushed that quickly. It’s like being in a big 
poker game. Here is this guy who has been winning big all night, he’s got a pile of chips 
that’s a mile-high, and all at once he starts to lose. Not a little bit, but a lot, and you want 
to feel bad for him and his falling empire. But you cram that back and bust him, or you 
take it in the eye. 

So I said, “We haven’t finished getting it on down here yet.” 

“What does that mean?” 

“It means stick it,” I said. Carol Granger’s eyes got round. 

“Decker-” 

“Call me Charlie. All my friends call me Charlie.” 

“Decker-” 

I held my hand up in front of the class and crossed the fingers in pairs. “If you don’t call 
me Charlie, I’m going to shoot somebody.” 


Pause. 



“Charlie?” 


“That’s better.” In the back row, Mike Gavin and Dick Keene were covering grins. Some 
of the others weren’t bothering to cover them. “You call me Charlie, and I’ll call you Tom. 
That okay, Tom?” 

Long, long pause. 

“When will you let them go, Charlie? They haven’t hurt you.” 

Outside, one of the town’s three black-and-whites and a blue state-police cruiser had 
arrived. They parked across the road from the high school, and Jerry Kesserling, the chief 
since Warren Talbot had retired into the local Methodist cemetery in 1975, began directing 
traffic onto the Oak Hill Pond road. 

“Did you hear me, Charlie?” 

“Yes. But I can’t tell you. I don’t know. There are more cops coming, I guess.” 

“Mr. Wolfe called them,” Mr. Denver said. “I imagine there will be a great deal more 
when they fully appreciate what’s going on. They’ll have tear gas and Mace, Dec ... 
Charlie. Why make it hard on yourself and your classmates?” 

“Tom?” 

Grudgingly: “What?” 

“You get your skinny cracked ass out there and tell them that the minute anyone shoots 
tear gas or anything else in here, I am going to make them sorry. You tell them to 
remember who’s driving.” 

“Why? Why are you doing this?” He sounded angry and impotent and frightened. He 
sounded like a man who has just discovered there is no place left to pass the buck. 

“I don’t know,” I said, “but it sure beats panty raids, Tom. And I don’t think it actually 
concerns you. All I want you to do is trot back out there and tell them what I said. Will 
you do that, Tom?” 

“I have no choice, do I?” 

“No, that’s right. You don’t. And there’s something else, Tom.” 

“What?” He asked it very hesitantly. 

“I don’t like you very much, Tom, as you have probably realized, but up to now you 
haven’t had to give much of a rip how I felt. But I’m out of your filing cabinet now, Tom. 
Have you got it? I’m not just a record you can lock up at three in the afternoon. Have you 
got it?” My voice was rising into a scream. “HAVE YOU GOT THAT, TOM? HAVE 
YOU INTERNALIZED THAT PARTICULAR FACT OF LIFE?” 

“Yes, Charlie,” he said in a deadly voice. “I have it.” 

“No you don’t, Tom. But you will. Before the day’s over, we are going to understand all 
about the difference between people and pieces of paper in a file, and the difference 
between doing your job and getting jobbed. What do you think of that, Tommy, my man?” 


“I think you’re a sick boy, Decker.” 



“No, you think I’m a sick boy, Charlie. Isn’t that what you meant to say, Tom?” 

“Yes...” 

“Say it.” 

“I think you’re a sick boy, Charlie.” The mechanical, embarrassed rote of a seven-year- 
old. 

“You’ve got some getting it on to do yourself, Tom. Now, get out there and tell them 
what I said. “ 

Denver cleared his throat as if he had something else to say, and then the intercom 
clicked off. A little murmur went through the class. I looked them over very carefully. 
Their eyes were so cool and somehow detached (shock can do that: you’re ejected like a 
fighter pilot from a humdrum dream of life to a grinding, overloaded slice of the real meat, 
and your brain refuses to make the adjustment; you can only free-fall and hope that sooner 
or later your chute will open), and a ghost of grammar school came back to me: Teacher, 
teacher, ring the bell, My lessons all to you I’ll tell, And when my day at school is through, 
I’ll know more than aught I knew. 

I wondered what they were learning today; what I was learning. The yellow school 
buses had begun to appear, and our classmates were going home to enjoy the festivities on 
living-room TVs and pocket transistor radios; but in Room 16, education went on. 

I rapped the butt of the pistol sharply on the desk. The murmur died. They were 
watching me as closely as I was watching them. Judge and jury, or jury and defendant? I 
wanted to cackle. 

“Well,” I said, “the shit has surely hit the fan. I think we need to talk a little. “ 

“Private?” George Yannick asked. “Just you and us?” He had an intelligent, perky face, 
and he didn’t look frightened. 

“Yes. “ 

“You better turn off that intercom, then. “ 

“You big-mouth son of a bitch,” Ted Jones said distinctly. George looked at him, 
wounded. 

There was an uncomfortable silence while I got up and pushed the little lever below the 
speaker from TALK-LISTEN to LISTEN. 

I went back and sat down again. I nodded at Ted. “I was thinking of it anyway,” I lied. 
“You shouldn’t take on so.” 

Ted didn’t say anything, but he offered me a strange little grin that made me think he 
might have been wondering about how I might taste. 

“Okay,” I said to the class at large. “I may be crazy, but I’m not going to shoot anyone 
for discussing this thing with me. Believe it. Don’t be afraid to shoot off your mouths. As 
long as we don’t all talk at once.” That didn’t look as if it was going to be a problem. “To 
take the bull by the horns, is there anyone here who really thinks I’m going to just up and 
murder them?” 



A few of them looked uneasy, but nobody said anything. 

“Okay. Because I’m not. We’re just going to sit around and bug the hell out of 
everybody. “ 

“Yeah, you sure bugged the hell out of Mrs. Underwood,” Ted said. He was still smiling 
his strange smile. 

“I had to. I know that’s hard to understand, but... I had to. It came down to that. And 
Mr. Vance. But I want everyone here to take it easy. No one is going to shoot the place up, 
so you don’t have to worry. “ 

Carol Granger raised her hand timidly. I nodded at her. She was smart, smart as a whip. 
Class president, and a cinch to speak a piece as valedictorian in June “Our Responsibilities 
to the Black Race” or maybe “Hopes for the Future. ” She was already signed up for one 
of those big-league women’s colleges where people always wonder how many virgins 
there are. But I didn’t hold it against her. 

“When can we go, Charlie?” 

I sighed and shrugged my shoulders. “We’ll just have to wait and see what happens.” 

“But my mother will be worried to death!” 

“Why?” Sylvia Ragan asked. “She knows where you are, doesn’t she?” 

General laugh. Except for Ted Jones. He wasn’t laughing, and I was going to have to 
watch that boy. He was still smiling his small, savage smile. He wanted badly to blow 
everything out of the water-obvious enough. But why? Insanity Prevention Merit Badge? 
Not enough. Adulation of the community in general-the boy who stood on the burning 
deck with his finger in the dike? It didn’t seem his style. Handsome low profile was Ted’s 
style. He was the only guy I knew who had quit the football team after three Saturdays of 
glory in his junior year. The guy who wrote sports for the local rag had called him the best 
mnning back Placerville High School had ever produced. But he had quit, suddenly and 
with no explanation. Amazing enough. What was more amazing was the fact that his 
popularity quotient hadn’t lost a point. If anything, Ted became more the local BMOC 
than ever. Joe McKennedy, who had suffered through four years and one broken nose at 
left tackle, told me that the only thing Ted would say when the agonized coach demanded 
an explanation was that football seemed to be a pretty stupid game, and he (Ted) thought 
that he could find a better way to spend his time. You can see why I respected him, but I 
was damned if I knew why he wanted me in such a personal way. A little thought on the 
matter might have helped, but things were going awful fast. 

“Are you nuts?” Harmon Jackson asked suddenly. 

“I think I must be,” I said. “Anyone who kills anyone else is nuts, in my book. “ 

“Well, maybe you ought to give yourself up,” Hannon said. “Get some help. A doctor. 
You know.” 

“You mean like that Grace?” Sylvia asked. “My God, that creepster. I had to go see him 
after I threw an inkwell at old lady Green. All he did was look up my dress and try to get 
me to talk about my sex life.” 



“Not that you’ve had any,” Pat Fitzgerald said, and there was another laugh. 

“And not that it’s any business of his or yours,” she said haughtily, dropped her cigarette 
on the floor, and mashed it. 

“So what are we going to do?” Jack Goldman asked. 

“Just get it on,” I said. “That’s all.” 

Out on the lawn, a second town police car had arrived. I guessed that the third one was 
probably down at Junior’s Diner, taking on vital shipments of coffee and doughnuts. 
Denver was talking with a state trooper in blue pants and one of those almost-Stetsons 
they wear. Up on the road, Jerry Kesserling was letting a few cars through the roadblock 
to pick up kids who didn’t ride the bus. The cars picked up and then drove hastily away. 
Mr. Grace was talking to a guy in a business suit that I didn’t know. The firemen were 
standing around and smoking cigarettes and waiting for someone to tell them to put out a 
fire or go home. 

“Has this got anything to do with you beating up Carlson?” Corky asked. 

“How should I know what it has to do with?” I asked him irritably. “If I knew what was 
making me do it, I probably wouldn’t have to.” 

“It’s your parents.” Susan Brooks spoke up suddenly. “It must be your parents. 

Ted Jones made a rude noise. 

I looked over at her, surprised. Susan Brooks was one of those girls who never say 
anything unless called upon, the ones that teachers always have to ask to speak up, please. 
Avery studious, very serious girl. A rather pretty but not terribly bright girl-the kind who 
isn’t allowed to give up and take the general or the commercial courses, because she had a 
terribly bright older brother or older sister, and teachers expect comparable things from 
her. In fine, one of those girls who are holding the dirty end of the stick with as much good 
grace and manners as they can muster. Usually they marry truck drivers and move to the 
West Coast, where they have kitchen nooks with Formica counters-and they write letters 
to the Folks Back East as seldom as they can get away with. They make quiet, successful 
lives for themselves and grow prettier as the shadow of the bright older brother or sister 
falls away from them. 

“My parents,” I said, tasting it. I thought about telling them I had been hunting with my 
dad when I was nine. “My Hunting Trip,” by Charles Decker. Subtitle: “Or, How I 
Overheard My Dad Explain the Cherokee Nose Job.” Too revolting. 

I snatched a look at Ted Jones, and the rich, coppery aroma of paydirt filled my nostrils. 
His face was set in a furious, jeering expression, as if someone had just forced a whole 
lemon into his mouth and then jammed his jaws together. As if someone had dropped a 
depth charge into his brains and sent some old, sunken hulk into long and ominous 
psychic vibrations. 

“That’s what it says in all the psychology books,” Susan was going on, all blithely 
unaware. “In fact ...” She suddenly became aware of the fact that she was speaking (and 
in a normal tone of voice, and in class) and clammed up. She was wearing a pale-jade- 



colored blouse, and her bra straps showed through like ghostly, half-erased chalk marks. 

“My parents,” I said again, and stopped again. I remembered the hunting trip again, but 
this time I remembered waking up, seeing the moving branches on the tight canvas of the 
tent (was the canvas tight? you bet it was-my dad put that tent up, and everything he did 
was tight, no loose screws there), looking at the moving branches, needing to whiz, feeling 
like a little kid again ... and remembering something that had happened long ago. I didn’t 
want to talk about that. I hadn’t talked about it with Mr. Grace. This was getting it on for 
real-and besides, there was Ted. Ted didn’t care for this at all. Perhaps it was all very 
important to him. Perhaps Ted could still be ... helped. I suspected it was much too late 
for me, but even on that level, don’t they say that learning is a good and elegant thing for 
its own sake? Sure. 

Outside, nothing much seemed to be going on. The last town police car had arrived, and, 
just as I had expected, they were handing out coffee-and. Story time chilluns. 

“My parents,” I said: 



Chapter 14 


My parents met at a wedding reception, and although it may have nothing to do with 
anything-unless you believe in omens-the bride that day was burned to death less than a 
year later. Her name was Jessie Decker Hannaford. As Jessie Decker, she had been my 
mom’s roommate at the University of Maine, where they were both majoring in political 
science. The thing that seemed to have happened was this: Jessie’s husband went out to a 
special town meeting, and Jessie went into the bathroom to take a shower. She fell down 
and hit her head and knocked herself unconscious. In the kitchen, a dish towel fell on a hot 
stove burner. The house went up like a rocket. Wasn’t it a mercy she didn’t suffer. 

So the only good that came of that wedding was my mother’s meeting with Jessie 
Decker Hannaford’s brother. He was an ensign in the Navy. After the reception, he asked 
my mother if she would like to go dancing. She said yes. They courted for six months, and 
then they were married. I came along about fourteen months after the nuptials, and I’ve 
done the math again and again. As near as I can figure, I was conceived on one of the 
nights just before or just after my father’s sister was being broiled alive in her shower cap. 
She was my mom’s bridesmaid. I’ve looked at all the wedding pictures, and no matter how 
often I’ve looked, it always gives me a weird feeling. There is Jessie holding my mother’s 
bridal train. Jessie and her husband, Brian Hannaford, smiling in the background as my 
mom and dad cut the wedding cake. Jessie dancing with the minister. And in all the 
pictures she is only five months away from the shower and the dishrag on the hot stove 
burner. You wish you could step into one of those Kodachromes and approach her, say: 
“You’re never going to be my aunt Jessie unless you stay out of the shower when your 
husband is away. Be careful, Aunt Jessie. ” But you can’t go back. For want of a shoe the 
horse was lost, and all that. 

But it happened, which is another way of saying I happened, and that’s it. I was an only 
child; my mother never wanted another. She’s very intellectual, my mother. Reads English 
mysteries, but never by Agatha Christie. Victor Canning and Hammond Innes were always 
more her cup of tea. Also magazines like The Manchester Guardian and Monocle and The 
New York Review of Books. My father, who made a career of the Navy and ended up as a 
recruiter, was more the all-American type. He likes the Detroit Tigers and the Detroit 
Redwings and wore a black armband the day Vince Lombardi died. No shit. And he reads 
those Richard Stark novels about Parker, the thief. That always amused the hell out of my 
mother. She finally broke down and told him that Richard Stark was really Donald 
Westlake, who writes sort of funny mysteries under his real name. My father tried one and 
hated it. After that he always acted like Westlake/Stark was his private lapdog who turned 
against him one night and tried to bite his throat. 

My earliest memory is of waking up in the dark and thinking I was dead until I saw the 
shadows moving on the walls and the ceiling-there was a big old elm outside my window, 
and the wind would move the branches. This particular night-the first night I remember 
anything-there must have been a full moon (hunter’s moon, do they call it?), because the 
walls were very bright and the shadows were very dark. The branch shadows looked like 
great moving fingers. Now when I think of it, they seem like corpse fingers. But I couldn’t 



have thought that then, could I? I was only three. A kid that little doesn’t even know what 
a corpse is. 

But there was something coming. I could hear it, down the hall. Something terrible was 
coming. Coming for me through the darkness. I could hear it, creaking and creaking and 
creaking. 

I couldn’t move. Maybe I didn’t even want to move. I don’t remember about that. I just 
lay and watched the tree fingers move on the wall and ceiling, and waited for the Creaking 
Thing to get down to my room and throw open the door. 

After a long time-it might have been an hour, or it might only have been seconds-I 
realized the Creaking Thing wasn’t after me at all. Or at least, not yet. It was after Mom 
and Dad down the hall. The Creaking Thing was in Mom and Dad’s room. 

I lay there, watching the tree fingers, and listened. Now the whole thing seems so 
dreamy and far away, like a city must look from a mountaintop where the air is rare, but 
very real just the same. I can remember the wind shuffling back and forth against the glass 
of my bedroom window. I can remember wetting myself-it was warm and somehow 
comforting. And I can remember the Creaking Thing. 

After a long, long, long time, I can remember my mother’s voice, out of breath and 
irritable, and a little afraid: “Stop now, Carl.” Again the creaking, furtive. “Stop it! “ 

A mutter from my father. 

From my mother: “I don’t care! I don’t care if you didn’t! Stop it and let me sleep! “ 

Sol knew. I went to sleep, but I knew. The Creaking Thing was my father. 



Chapter 15 


Nobody said anything. Some of them hadn’t got the point, if there was one; I wasn’t 
sure. They were still looking at me expectantly, as if awaiting the punch line of a rather 
good joke. 

Others were studying their hands, obviously embarrassed. But Susan Brooks looked 
altogether radiant and vindicated. It was a very nice thing to see. I felt like a farmer, 
spreading shit and growing corn. 

Still nobody said anything. The clock buzzed away with a vague kind of determination. I 
looked down at Mrs. Underwood. Her eyes were half-open, glazed, gummy. She looked 
no more important than a woodchuck I had once blown away with my father’s four-ten. A 
fly was unctuously washing its paws on her forearm. Feeling a little disgusted, I waved it 
away. 

Outside, four more police cars had arrived. Other cars were parked along the shoulder of 
the highway for as far as I could see beyond the roadblock. Quite a crowd was gathering. I 
sat back, dry-scrubbed the side of my face with my hand, and looked at Ted. He held up 
his fists to shoulder height, smiled, and popped up the middle fingers on each one. 

He didn’t speak, but his lips moved, and I read it easily: Shit. 

Nobody knew it had been passed but him and me. He looked ready to speak aloud, but I 
wanted to just keep it between us for a little while. I said: 



Chapter 16 


My dad has hated me for as long as I can remember. 

That’s a pretty sweeping statement, and I know how phony it sounds. It sounds petulant 
and really fantastic-the kind of weapon kids always use when the old man won’t come 
across with the car for your heavy date at the drive-in with Peggy Sue or when he tells you 
that if you flunk world history the second time through he’s going to beat the living hell 
out of you. In this bright day and age when everybody thinks psychology is God’s gift to 
the poor old anally fixated human race and even the president of the United States pops a 
trank before dinner, it’s really a good way to get rid of those Old Testament guilts that 
keep creeping up our throats like the aftertaste of a bad meal we overate. If you say your 
father hated you as a kid, you can go out and flash the neighborhood, commit rape, or burn 
down the Knights of Pythias bingo parlor and still cop a plea. 

But it also means that no one will believe you if it’s true. You’re the little boy that cried 
wolf. And for me it is true. Oh, nothing really stunning until after the Carlson thing. I 
don’t think Dad himself really knew it until then. Even if you could dig to the very bottom 
of his motives, he’d probably say-at the most-that he was hating me for my own good. 

Metaphor time in the old corral: To Dad, life was like a precious antique car. Because it 
is both precious and irreplaceable, you keep it immaculate and in perfect running order. 
Once a year you take it to the local Old Car Show. No grease is ever allowed to foul the 
gasoline, no sludge to find its way into the carb, no bolt to loosen on the driveshaft. It 
must be tuned, oiled, and greased every thousand miles, and you have to wax it every 
Sunday, just before the pro game on TV. My dad’s motto: Keep It Tight and Keep It Right. 
And if a bird shits on your windshield, you wipe it off before it can dry there. 

That was Dad’s life, and I was the birdshit on his windshield. 

He was a big, quiet man with sandy hair, a complexion that burned easily, and a face that 
had a vague-but not unpleasant-touch of the simian. In the summertime he always looked 
angry, with his face sunburned red and his eyes peering belligerently out at you like pale 
glints of water. Later, after I was ten, he was transferred to Boston and we saw him only on 
weekends, but before that he was stationed in Portland, and as far as I was concerned, he 
was like any other nineto-five father, except that his shirt was khaki instead of white, and 
his tie was always black. 

It says in the Bible that the sins of the fathers are visited upon the sons, and that may be 
true. But I could also add that the sins of other fathers’ sons were visited on me. Being a 
recruiting chief was very tough on Dad, and I often thought he would have been much 
happier stationed out to sea-not to mention how much happier I would have been. For him 
it was like having to go around and see other people’s priceless antique cars driven to rack 
and ruin, mud-splattered, rust-eaten. He in ducted high-school Romeos leaving their 
pregnant Juliets behind them. He in ducted men who didn’t know what they were getting 
into and men who only cared about what they were getting out of. He got the sullen young 
men who had been made to choose between a bang in the Navy and a bang in South 
Portland Training and Correction. He got scared bookkeepers who had turned up 1-A and 



would have done anything to keep away from the gooks in Nam, who were just then 
beginning their long-running special on Pickled Penis of American Grunt. And he got the 
slack jawed dropouts who had to be coached before they could sign their own names and 
had IQs to match their hat sizes. 

And there was me, right there at home, with some budding characteristics attributable to 
all of the above. Quite a challenge there. And you have to know that he didn’t hate me just 
because I was there; he hated me because he was unequal to the challenge. He might have 
been if I hadn’t been more my mother’s child than his, and if my mother and I hadn’t both 
known that. He called me a mamma’s boy. Maybe I was. 

One day in the fall of 1962 I took it into my head to throw rocks at the storm windows 
Dad was getting ready to put on. It was early October, a Saturday, and Dad was going at it 
the way he went at everything, with a step-by-step precision that precluded all error and 
waste. 

First he got all the windows out of the garage (newly painted the spring before, green to 
match the house trim) and lined them up carefully against the house, one beside each 
window. I can see him, tall and sunburned and angry-looking, even under the cool October 
sun, in the vintage October air, which was as cool as kisses. October is such a fine month. 

I was sitting on the bottom step of the front porch, playing Quiet and watching him. 
Every now and then a car would blip by going up Route 9 toward Winsor or down 9 
toward Harlow or Freeport. Mom was inside, playing the piano. Something minor-Bach, I 
think. But then, whatever Mother played usually sounded like Bach. The wind tugged and 
pushed it, now bringing it to me, now carrying it away. Whenever I hear that piece now, I 
think about that day. Bach Fugue for Storm Windows in A Minor. 

I sat and played Quiet. A 1956 Ford with an out-of-state license plate went by. Up here 
to shoot partridge and pheasant, probably. A robin landed by the elm tree that threw 
shadows on my bedroom wall at night, and pecked through the fallen leaves for a worm. 
My mother played on, right hand rippling the melody, left hand counterpointing it. Mother 
could play wonderful boogie-woogie when the urge struck her, but it didn’t often. She just 
didn’t like it, and it was probably just as well. Even her boogies sounded like Bach wrote 
them. 

All at once it occurred to me how wonderful it would be to break all those storm 
windows. To break them one by one; the upper panes, and then the lower ones. 

You might think it was a piece of revenge, conscious or unconscious, a way to get back 
at the spit-and-polish, all-hands-on-deck old man. But the truth is, I can’t remember 
putting my father in that particular picture at all. The day was fine and beautiful. I was 
four. It was a fine October day for breaking windows. 

I got up and went out to the soft shoulder and began picking up stones. I was wearing 
short pants, and I stuffed stones into the front pockets until it must have looked like I was 
carrying ostrich eggs. Another car went by, and I waved. The driver waved back. The 
woman beside him was holding a baby. 

I went back across the lawn, took a stone out of my pocket, and threw it at the storm 



window beside the living-room window. I threw it as hard as I could. I missed. I took out 
another rock, and this time I moved right up on top of that window. A little chill went 
through my mind, disturbing my thoughts for a tiny moment. I couldn’t miss. And didn’t. 

I went right around the house breaking windows. First the living-room window, then the 
music-room window. It was propped up against the brick side of the house, and after I 
broke it I looked in at Mom, playing the piano. She was wearing a sheer blue slip. When 
she saw me peering in, she jumped a little and hit a sour note, then she gave me a big 
sweet smile and went on playing. You can see how it was. She hadn’t even heard me break 
the window. 

Funny, in a way-there was no sense of doing anything wrong, just of doing something 
pleasurable. A little kid’s selective perception is a strange thing; if the windows had been 
fastened on, I never would have dreamed of breaking them. 

I was regarding the last window, the one outside the den, when a hand fell on my 
shoulder and turned me around. It was my father. He was mad. I hadn’t ever seen him so 
mad. His eyes were big, and he was biting his tongue between his teeth as if he were 
having a fit. I cried out, he scared me so bad. It was like your mother coming to the 
breakfast table with a Halloween mask on. 

“Bastard”’ 

He picked me up in both hands, right hand holding my legs at the ankles and left hand 
holding my left arm against my chest, and then he threw me on the ground. It was hard-as 
hard as he could throw, I think. I lay there with all the breath out of me, staring up at the 
dismay and realization creeping over his face, dissolving the flash of his anger. I was 
unable to cry or speak or even move my diaphragm. There was a paralyzing pain in my 
chest and my crotch. 

“I didn’t mean it,” he said, kneeling over me. “You all right? You okay, Chuck?” Chuck 
was what he called me when we were playing toss in the backyard. 

My lungs operated in a spasmodic, lurching gasp. I opened my mouth and let out a huge, 
screaming bray. The sound scared me, and the next scream was even louder. Tears turned 
everything to prisms. The sound of the piano stopped. 

“You shouldn’t have broken those windows,” he said. Anger was replacing dismay. 
“Now, shut up. Be a man, for God’s sake.” 

He jerked me roughly to my feet just as Mom flew around the comer of the house, still 
in her slip. 

“He broke all the storm windows,” my father said. “Go put something on.” 

“What’s the matter?” she cried. “Oh, Charlie, did you cut yourself? Where? Show me 
where!” 

“He isn’t cut,” Dad said disgustedly. “He’s afraid he’s going to get licked. And he 
damned well is.” 

I ran to my mother and pressed my face into her belly, feeling the soft, comforting silk 
of her slip, smelling her sweet smell. My whole head felt swollen and pulpy, like a turnip. 



My voice had turned into a cracked donkey bray. I closed my eyes tightly. 

“What are you talking about, licking him? He’s purple! If you’ve hurt him, Carl...” 

“He started to cry when he saw me coming, for Christ’s sake.” 

The voices were coming from high above me, like amplified declarations from 
mountaintops. 

“There’s a car coming,” he said. “Go inside, Rita.” 

“Come on, love,” my mother said. “Smile for mummy. Big smile.” She pushed me away 
from her stomach and wiped tears from under my eyes. Have you ever had your mother 
wipe your tears away? About that the hack poets are right. It’s one of life’s great 
experiences, right up there with your first ball game and your first wet dream. “There, 
honey, there. Daddy didn’t mean to be cross.” 

“That was Sam Castinguay and his wife,” my father said. “Now you’ve given that 
motor-mouth something to talk about. I hope-” 

“Come on, Charlie,” she said, taking my hand. “We’ll have chocolate. In my sewing 
room.” 

“The hell you will,” Dad said curtly. I looked back at him. His fists were clenched 
angrily as he stood in front of the one window he had saved. “He’ll just puke it up when I 
whale the tar out of him.” 

“You’ll whale no tar out of anyone,” she said. “You’ve scared him half to death already 

Then he was over to her, not minding her slip anymore, or Sam and his wife. He grabbed 
her shoulder and pointed to the jagged kitchen storm window. “Look! Look! He did that, 
and now you want to give him chocolate! He’s no baby anymore, Rita, it’s time for you to 
stop giving him the tit!” 

I cringed against her hip, and she wrenched her shoulder away. White fingermarks stood 
out on her flesh for a moment and then filled in red. 

“Go inside,” she said calmly. “You’re being quite foolish, Carl.” 

“I’m going to-” 

“Don’t tell me what you’ll do!” she shouted suddenly, advancing on him. He flinched 
away instinctively. “Go inside! You’ve done enough damage! Go inside! Go find some of 
your friends and have drinks! Go anywhere! But ... get out of my sight! “ 

“Punishment,” he said deliberately. “Did anyone teach you that word in college, or were 
they too busy filling you full of that liberal bullshit? Next time, he may break something 
more valuable than a few storm windows. A few times after that, he may break your heart. 
Wanton destruction-” 

“Get out!” she screamed. 

I began to cry again, and shrank away from them both. For a moment I stood between, 
tottering, and then my mother gathered me up. It’s all right, honey, she was saying, but I 
was watching my father, who had turned and was stomping away like a surly little boy. It 



wasn’t until then, until I had seen with what practiced and dreadful ease he had been 
banished, that I began to dare to hate him back. 

While my mother and I were having cocoa in her sewing room, I told her how Dad had 
thrown me on the ground. I told her Dad had lied. 

It made me feel quite wonderful and strong. 



Chapter 17 


“What happened then?” Susan Brooks asked breathlessly. 

“Not much, ” I said. “It blew over. ” Now that it was out, I found myself mildly 
surprised that it had stuck in my throat so long. I once knew a kid, Herk Orville, who ate a 
mouse. I dared him, and he swallowed it. Raw. It was just a small fieldmouse, and it didn’t 
look hurt at all when we found it; maybe it had just died of old age. Anyway, Herk’s mom 
was out hanging clothes, and she just happened to look over at us, sitting in the dirt by the 
back step. She looked just in time to see the mouse going down Herk’s throat, headfirst. 

She screamed-what a fright it can give you when a grown-up screams!-and ran over and 
put her finger down Herk’s throat. Herk threw up the mouse, the hamburger he’d eaten for 
lunch, and some pasty glop that looked like tomato soup. He was just starting to ask his 
mother what was going on when she threw up. And there, in all that puke, that old dead 
mouse didn’t look bad at all. It sure looked better than the rest of the stuff. The moral 
seemed to be that puking up your past when the present is even worse makes some of the 
vomitus look nearly tasty. I started to tell them that, and then decided it would only revolt 
them-like the story of the Cherokee Nose Job. 

“Dad was in the doghouse for a few days. That was all. No divorce. No big thing.” 

Carol Granger started to say something, and that was when Ted stood up. His face was 
pale as cheese except for two burning patches of red, one above each cheekbone. He was 
grinning. Did I tell you he wore his hair in a duck’s ass cut? Grease, out of style, not cool. 
But Ted got away with it. In that click of a second when he stood up, he looked like the 
ghost of James Dean come to get me, and my heart quailed. 

“I’m going to take that gun away from you now, tin shit,” he said, grinning. His teeth 
were white and even. 

I had to fight hard to keep my voice steady, but I think I did pretty well. “Sit down, Ted.” 

Ted didn’t move forward, but I could see how badly he wanted to. “That makes me sick, 
you know it? Trying to blame something like this on your folks. “ 

“Did I say I was trying to-?” 

“Shut up!” he said in a rising, strident voice. “You killed two people!” 

“How really observant of you to notice,” I said. 

He made a horrible rippling movement with his hands, holding them at waist level, and I 
knew that in his mind he had just grabbed me and eaten me. 

“Put that down, Charlie,” he said, grinning. “Just put that gun down and fight me fair.” 

“Why did you quit the football team, Ted?” I asked amiably. It was very hard to sound 
amiable, but it worked. He looked stunned, suddenly unsure, as if no one but the stolidly 
predictable coach had ever dared ask him that. He looked as if he had suddenly become 
aware of the fact that he was the only one standing. It was akin to the look a fellow gets 
when he realizes his zipper is down, and is trying to think of a nice unobtrusive way to get 



it back up-so it will look like an act of God. 

“Never mind that,” he said. “Put down that gun.” It sounded melodramatic as hell. 

Phony. He knew it. 

“Afraid for your balls? Your ever-loving sack? Was that it?” 

Irma Bates gasped. Sylvia, however, was watching with a certain predatory interest. 

“You ... ” He sat down suddenly in his seat, and somebody chuckled in the back of the 
room. I’ve always wondered exactly who that was. Dick Keene? Harmon Jackson? 

But I saw their faces. And what I saw surprised me. You might even say it shocked me. 
Because there was pleasure there. There had been a showdown, a verbal shootout, you 
might say, and I had won. But why did that make them happy? Like those maddening 
pictures you sometimes see in the Sunday paper-“Why are these people laughing? Turn to 
page 41.” Only, there was no page for me to turn to. 

And it’s important to know, you know. I’ve thought and thought, racked whatever brains 
I have left, and I don’t know. Maybe it was only Ted himself, handsome and brave, full of 
the same natural machismo that keeps the wars well-attended. Simple jealousy, then. The 
need to see everyone at the same level, gargling in the same rat-race choir, to paraphrase 
Dylan. Take off your mask, Ted, and sit down with the rest of us regular guys. 

Ted was still staring at me, and I knew well enough that he was unbroken. Only, next 
time he might not be so direct. Maybe next time he would try me on the flank. 

Maybe it’s just mob spirit. Jump on the individual. 

But I didn’t believe that then, and I don’t believe it now, although it would explain 
much. No, the subtle shift from Ted’s end of the seesaw to mine could not be dismissed as 
some mass grunt of emotion. A mob always wipes out the strange one, the sport, the 
mutant. That was me, not Ted. Ted was the exact opposite of those things. He was a boy 
you would have been proud to have down in the rumpus room with your daughter. No, it 
was in Ted, not in them. It had to be in Ted. I began to feel strange tentacles of excitement 
in my belly-the way a butterfly collector must feel when he thinks he has just seen a new 
species fluttering in yon bushes. 

“I know why Ted quit football,” a voice said slyly. I looked around. It was Pig Pen. Ted 
had fairly jumped at the sound of his voice. He was beginning to look a wee bit haggard. 

“Do tell,” I said. 

“If you open your mouth, I’ll kill you,” Ted said deliberately. He turned his grin on Pig 
Pen. 

Pig Pen blinked in a terrified way and licked his lips. He was torn. It was probably the 
first time in his life that he’d had the ax, and now he didn’t know if he dared to grind it. Of 
course, almost anyone in the room could have told you how he came by any information 
he had; Mrs. Dano spent her life attending bazaars, rummage sales, church and school 
suppers, and Mrs. Dano had the longest, shrewdest nose in Gates Falls. I also suspected 
she held the record for party-line listening in. She could latch on to anyone’s dirty laundry 
before you could say have-you-heard-the-latest-about-Sam-Delacorte. 



“I ... ” Pig Pen began, and turned away from Ted as he made an impotent clutching 
gesture with his hands. 

“Go on and tell,” Sylvia Ragan said suddenly. “Don’t let Golden Boy scare you, hon.” 

Pig Pen gave her a quivering smile and then blurted out: “Mrs. Jones is an alcoholic. She 
had to go someplace and dry out. Ted had to help with his family.” 

Silence for a second. 

“I’m going to kill you, Pig Pen,” Ted said, getting up. His face was dead pale. 

“Now, that’s not nice,” I said. “You said so yourself. Sit down.” 

Ted glared at me, and for a moment I thought he was going to break and charge at me. If 
he had, I would have killed him. Maybe he could see it on my face. He sat back down. 

“So,” I said. “The skeleton has boogied right out of the closet. Where’s she drying out, 
Ted?” 

“Shut up,” he said thickly. Some of his hair had fallen across his forehead. It looked 
greasy. It was the first time it had ever looked that way to me. 

“Oh, she’s back now,” Pig Pen said, and offered Ted a forgiving smile. 

“You said you’d kill Pig Pen,” I said thoughtfully. 

“I will kill him,” Ted muttered. His eyes were red and baleful. 

“Then you can blame it on your parents,” I said, smiling. “Won’t that be a relief?” 

Ted was gripping the edge of his desk tightly. Things weren’t going to his liking at all. 
Harmon Jackson was smiling nastily. Maybe he had an old grudge against Ted. 

“Your father drive her to it?” I asked kindly. “How’d it happen? Home late all the time? 
Supper burned and all that? Nipping on the cooking sherry a little at first? Hi-ho.” 

“I’ll kill you.” he moaned. 

I was needling him-needling the shit out of him-and no one was telling me to stop. It 
was incredible. They were all watching Ted with a glassy kind of interest, as if they had 
expected all along that there were a few maggots under there. 

“Must be tough, being married to a big-time bank officer,” I said. “Look at it that way. 
She probably didn’t realize she was belting down the hard stuff so heavy. It can creep up 
on you, look at it that way. It can get on top of you. And it’s not your fault, is it? Hi-ho.” 

“Shut up! ” he screamed at me. 

“There it was, right under your nose, but it just got out of control, am I right? Kind of 
disgusting, wasn’t it? Did she really go to pot, Ted? Tell us. Get rid of it. Kind of just 
slopping around the house, was she?” 

“Shut up! Shut up! “ 

“Drunk in front of Dialing for Dollars? Seeing bugs in the corners? Or was she quiet 
about it? Did she see bugs? Did she? Did she go bugs?” 

“Yeah, it was disgusting!” He brayed at me suddenly, through a mouthful of spit. 



“Almost as disgusting as you! Killer! Killer!” 


“Did you write her?” I asked softly. 

“Why would I write her?” he asked wildly. “Why should I write her? She copped out.” 

“And you couldn’t play football.” 

Ted Jones said clearly, “Drunk bitch. “ 

Carol Granger gasped, and the spell was broken. Ted’s eyes seemed to clear a little. The 
red light went out of them, and he realized what he had said. 

“I’ll get you for this, Charlie,” he said quietly. 

“You might. You might get your chance. ” I smiled. “A drunken old bitch of a mother. 
That surely is disgusting, Ted.” 

Ted sat silently, stating at me. 

It was over, then. We could turn our attention to other things-at least, for the moment. I 
had a feeling we might be getting back to Ted. Or that he would get back to me. 

People moved around restlessly outside. 

The clock buzzed. 

No one said anything for a long time, or what seemed like a long time. There was a lot 
to think about now. 



Chapter 18 


Sylvia Ragan finally broke the silence. She threw back her head and laughed long, hard, 
and loud. Several people, including me, jumped. Ted Jones didn’t. He was still on his own 
trip. “You know what I’d like to do after this is over?” she asked. 

“What?” Pig Pen asked. He looked surprised that he had spoken up again. Sandra Cross 
was looking at me gravely. She had her ankles crossed the way pretty girls do when they 
want to foil boys who want to look up their dresses. 

“I’d like to get this in a detective magazine. ‘Sixty Minutes of Terror with the Placerville 
Maniac.’ I’d get somebody who writes good to do it. Joe McKennedy or Phil Franks ... or 
maybe you, Charlie. How’s that bite your banana?” She guffawed, and Pig Pen joined in 
tentatively. I think he was fascinated by Sylvia’s fearlessness. Or maybe it was only her 
blatant sexuality. She sure didn’t have her ankles crossed. 

Out on the lawn, two more trooper cars had arrived. The firemen were leaving; the fire 
alarm had cut out a few minutes ago. Abruptly Mr. Grace disengaged himself from the 
crowd and started toward the main doors. A light breeze flapped the bottom of his sport 
coat. 

“More company,” Corky Herald said. 

I got up, went over to the intercom, and switched it back onto TALK-LISTEN. Then I 
sat down again, sweating a little. Mr. Don-God-Give-Us-Grace was on his way. And he 
was no lightweight. 

A few seconds later there was that hollow chink! that means the line is open. Mr. Grace 
said, “Charlie?” His voice was very calm, very rich, very certain. 

“How are you, skinner?” I asked. 

“Fine, thanks, Charlie. How are you?” 

“Keeping my thumb on it,” I said agreeably. 

Snickers from some of the boys. 

“Charlie, we’ve talked about getting help for you before this. Now, you’ve committed a 
pretty antisocial act, wouldn’t you agree?” 

“By whose standards?” 

“Society’s standards, Charlie. First Mr. Carlson, now this. Will you let us help you?” 

I almost asked him if my co-students weren’t a part of society, because no one down 
here seemed too worked up about Mrs. Underwood. But I couldn’t do that. It would have 
transgressed a set of rules that I was just beginning to grasp. 

“How does Ah do it?” I bawled. “Ah already tole dat dere Mr. Denber how sorry Ah is 
for hittin’ dat l’il girl wit dat Loosyville Sluggah. Ali wants mah poor paid shrunk! Ali 
wants mah soul saved an’ made white as snow! How does Ah do it, Rev’rund?” 

Pat Fitzgerald, who was nearly as black as the ace of spades, laughed and shook his 



head. 


“Charlie, Charlie,” Mr. Grace said, as if very sad. “Only you can save your soul now.” 

I didn’t like that. I stopped shouting and put my hand on the pistol, as if for courage. I 
didn’t like it at all. He had a way of slipping it to you. I’d seen him a lot since I bopped 
Mr. Carlson with the pipe wrench. He could really slip it in. 

“Mr. Grace?” 

“What, Charlie?” 

“Did Tom tell the police what I said?” 

“Don’t you mean ‘Mr. Denver’?” 

“Whatever. Did he ... ?” 

“Yes, he relayed your message.” 

“Have they figured out how they’re going to handle me yet?” 

“I don’t know, Charlie. I’m more interested in knowing if you’ve figured out how you’re 
going to handle yourself.” 

Oh, he was slipping it to me, all right. Just like he kept slipping it to me after Mr. 
Carlson. But then I had to go see him. Now I could turn him off anytime I wanted to. 
Except I couldn’t, and he knew I couldn’t. It was too normal to be consistent. And I was 
being watched by my peerless peers. They were evaluating me. 

“Sweating a little?” I asked the intercom. 

“Are you?” 

“You guys,” I said, an edge of bitterness creeping into my voice. “You’re all the same. “ 

“We are? If so, then we all want to help you.” 

He was going to be a much tougher nut to strip than old Tom Denver had been. That was 
obvious. I called Don Grace up in my mind. Short, dapper little fuck. Bald on top, big 
muttonchop sideburns, as if to make up for it. He favored tweed coats with suede patches 
on the elbows. A pipe always stuffed with something that came from Copenhagen and 
smelled like cowshit. A man with a headful of sharp, prying instruments. A mind-fucker, a 
head-stud. That’s what a shrink is for, my friends and neighbors; their job is to fuck the 
mentally disturbed and make them pregnant with sanity. It’s a bull’s job, and they go to 
school to learn how, and all their courses are variations on a theme: Slipping It to the 
Psychos for Fun and Profit, Mostly Profit. And if you find yourself someday lying on that 
great analyst’s couch where so many have lain before you, I’d ask you to remember one 
thing: When you get sanity by stud, the child always looks like the father. And they have a 
very high suicide rate. 

But they get you lonely, and ready to cry, they get you ready to toss it all over if they 
will just promise to go away for a while. What do we have? What do we really have? 
Minds like terrified fat men, begging the eyes that look up in the bus terminal or the 
restaurant and threaten to meet ours to look back down, uninterested. We lie awake and 
picture ourselves in white hats of varying shapes. There’s no maidenhead too tough to 



withstand the seasoned dork of modern psychiatry. But maybe that was okay. Maybe now 
they would play my game, all these shysters and whores. 

“Let us help you, Charlie,” Mr. Grace was saying. 

“But by letting you help me, I would be helping you.” I said it as if the idea had just 
occurred to me. “Don’t want to do that.” 

“Why, Charlie?” 

“Mr. Grace?” 

“Yes, Charlie?” 

“The next time you ask me a question, I’m going to kill somebody down here. ” I could 
hear Mr. Grace suck wind, as if someone had just told him his son had been in a car crash. 
It was a very un-self-confident sound. It made me feel very good. 

Everyone in the room was looking at me tightly. Ted Jones raised his head slowly, as if 
he had just awakened. I could see the familiar, hating darkness cloud his eyes. Anne 
Lasky’s eyes were round and frightened. Sylvia Ragan’s fingers were doing a slow and 
dreamy ballet as they rummaged in her purse for another cigarette. And Sandra Cross was 
looking at me gravely, gravely, as if I were a doctor, or a priest. 

Mr. Grace began to speak. 

“Watch it!” I said sharply. “Before you say anything, be careful. You aren’t playing your 
game any longer. Understand that. You’re playing mine. Statements only. Be very careful. 
Can you be very careful?” 

He didn’t say anything about my game metaphor at all. That was when I began to 
believe I had him. 

“Charlie ... “Was that almost a plea? 

“Very good. Do you think you’ll be able to keep your job after this, Mr. Grace?” 

“Charlie, for God’s sake ... “ 

“Ever so much better. “ 

“Let them go, Charlie. Save yourself. Please.” 

“You’re talking too fast. Pretty soon a question will pop out, and that’ll be the end for 
somebody.” 

“Charlie ... “ 

“How was your military obligation fulfilled?” 

“Wh ...” Sudden whistling of breath as he cut that off. 

“You almost killed somebody,” I said. “Careful, Don. I can call you Don, can’t I? Sure. 
Weigh those words, Don.” 

I was reaching out for him. 

I was going to break him. 

In that second it seemed as if maybe I could break them all. 



“I think I better sign off for the moment, Charlie.” 

“If you go before I say you can, I’ll shoot somebody. What you’re going to do is sit there 
and answer my questions.” 

The first sweaty desperation, as well concealed as underarm perspiration at the junior 
prom: “I really mustn’t, Charlie. I can’t take the responsibility for-” 

“Responsibility?” I screamed. “My God, you’ve been taking the responsibility ever 
since they let you loose from college! Now you want to cop out the first time your bare ass 
is showing! But I’m in the driver’s seat, and by God you’ll pull the cart! Or I’ll do just 
what I said. Do you dig it? Do you understand me?” 

“I won’t play a cheap parlor game with human lives for party favors, Charlie. “ 

“Congratulations to you,” I said. “You just described modern psychiatry. That ought to 
be the textbook definition, Don. Now, let me tell you: you’ll take a piss out the window if 
I tell you to. And God help you if I catch you in a lie. That will get somebody killed too. 
Ready to bare your soul, Don? Are you on your mark?” 

He drew in his breath raggedly. He wanted to ask if I really meant it, but he was afraid I 
might answer with the gun instead of my mouth. He wanted to reach out quick and shut 
off the intercom, but he knew he would hear the echo of the shot in the empty building, 
rolling around in the corridor below him like a bowling ball up a long alley from hell. 

“All right,” I said. I unbuttoned my shirt cuffs. Out on the lawn, the cops and Tom 
Denver and Mr. Johnson were standing around restlessly, waiting for the return of their 
tweedy bull stud. Read my dreams, Sigmund. Squirt 'em with the sperm of symbols and 
make 'em grow. Show me how we’re different from, say, rabid dogs or old tigers full of 
bad blood. Show me the man hiding between my wet dreams. They had every reason to be 
confident (although they did not look confident). In the symbolic sense, Mr. Grace was 
Pathfinder of the Western World. Bull stud with a compass. 

Natty Bumppo was breathing raggedly from the little latticed box over my head. I 
wondered if he’d read any good rapid eye movements lately. I wondered what his own 
would be like when night finally came. 


“All right, Don. Let’s get it on.” 



Chapter 19 


“How was your military obligation fulfilled?” 

“In the Army, Charlie. This isn’t going to accomplish anything.” 

“In what capacity?” 

“As a doctor. “ 

“Psychiatrist?” 

“No. “ 

“How long have you been a practicing psychiatrist?” 

“Five years.” 

“Have you ever eaten your wife out?” 

“Wh ...” Terrified, angry pause. 

“I ... I don’t know the meaning of the phrase. “ 

“I’ll rephrase it, then. Have you ever engaged in oral-genital practices with your wife?” 
“I won’t answer that. You have no right.” 

“I have all the rights. You have none. Answer, or I’ll shoot someone. And remember, if 
you lie and I catch you in a lie, I’ll shoot someone. Have you ever engaged in-?” 

“No!” 

“How long have you been a practicing psychiatrist?” 

“Five years. “ 

“Why?” 

“Wh ... Well, because it fulfills me. As a person.” 

“Has your wife ever had an affair with another man?” 

“No.” 

“Another woman?” 

“How do you know?” 

“She loves me.” 

“Has your wife ever given you a blow job, Don?” 

“I don’t know what you-” 

“You know goddamn well what I mean!” 

“No, Charlie, I-” 

“Ever cheat on an exam in college?” 

Pause. “Absolutely not.” 

“On a quiz?” 



“No.” 

I pounced. “Then how can you say your wife has never engaged in oral-genital sex 
practices with you?” 

“I ... I never ... Charlie 

“Where did you do your basic training?” 

“F-Fort Benning.” 

“What year?” 

“I don’t remem-” 

“Give me a year or I’m going to shoot somebody down here!” 

“Nineteen-fifty-six. “ 

“Were you a grunt?” 

“I ... I don’t-” 

“Were you a grunt? Were you a dogface?” 

“I was ... I was an officer. First lieu-” 

“I didn’t ask you for that!” I screamed. 

“Charlie ... Charlie, for God’s sake, calm down-” 

“What year was your military obligation fulfilled?” 

“N-Nineteen-sixty.” 

“You owe your country six years! You’re lying! I’m going to shoot-” 

“No!” He cried. “National Guard! I was in the Guard!” 

“What was your mother’s maiden name?” 

“G-G-Gavin. “ 

“Why?” 

“Wh ... I don’t know what you m-” 

“Why was her maiden name Gavin?” 

“Because her father’s name was Gavin. Charlie-” 

“In what year did you do your basic training?” 

“Nineteen-fifty-sev-six! ” 

“You’re lying. Caught you, didn’t I, Don?” 

“No! I-I-“ 

“You started to say fifty-seven. ” 

“I was mixed up.” 

“I’m going to shoot somebody. In the guts, I think. Yes.” 

“Charlie, for Jesus’ sake!” 



“Don’t let it happen again. You were a grunt, right? In the Army?” 

“Yes-no-I was an officer ... “ 

“What was your father’s middle name?” 

“J-John. Chuh-Charlie, get hold of yourself. D-D-Don’t-” 

“Ever gobbled your wife, my man?” 

“No!” 

“You’re lying. You said you didn’t know what that meant.” 

“You explained it to me!” He was breathing in fast little grunts. “Let me go, Charlie, let 
me g-” 

“What is your religious denomination?” 

“Methodist. “ 

“In the choir?” 

“No.” 

“Did you go to Sunday school?” 

“Yes.” 

“What are the first three words in the Bible?” 

Pause. “In the beginning.” 

“First line of the Twenty-third Psalm?” 

“The ... um ... The Lord is my shepherd, I shall not want.” 

“And you first ate your wife in 1956?” 

“Yes-no ... Charlie, let me alone ... “ 

“Basic training, what year?” 

“Nineteen-fifty-six!” 

“You said fifty-seven before!” I screamed. “Here it goes! I’m going to blow someone’s 
head off right now!” 

“I said fifty-six, you bastard!” Screaming, out of breath, hysterical. 

“What happened to Jonah, Don?” 

“He was swallowed by a whale.” 

“The Bible says big fish, Don. Is that what you meant?” 

“Yeah. Big fish. ‘Course it was.” Pitifully eager. 

“Who built the ark?” 

“Noah. “ 

“Where did you do your basic?” 

“Fort Benning.” 



More confident; familiar ground. He was letting himself be lulled. “Ever eaten your 
wife?” 

“No.” 

“What?” 

“No!” 

“What’s the last book in the Bible, Don?” 

“Revelations. “ 

“Actually it’s just Revelation. No s. Right?” 

“Right, sure, right.” 

“Who wrote it?” 

“John. “ 

“What was your father’s middle name?” 

“John.” 

“Ever get a revelation from your father, Don?” 

A strange, high, cackling laugh from Don Grace. Some of the kids blinked uneasily at 
the sound of that laugh. “Uh ... no ... Charlie ... I can’t say that I ever did.” 

“What was your mother’s maiden name?” 

“Gavin.” 

“Is Christ numbered among the martyrs?” 

“Ye-ess ... ” He was too Methodist to really be sure. 

“How was he martyred?” 

“By the cross. Crucified.” 

“What did Christ ask God on the cross?” 

” ‘My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?’ “ 

“Don?” 

“Yes, Charlie.” 

“What did you just say?” 

“I said ‘My God, my God, why ...’ ” Pause. “Oh, no, Charlie. That’s not fair! “ 

“You asked a question.” 

“You tricked me!” 

“You just killed someone, Don. Sorry.” 

“No!” 

I fired the pistol into the floor. The whole class, which had been listening with taut, 
hypnotic attention, flinched. Several people screamed. Pig Pen fainted again, and he struck 
the floor with a satisfying meat thump. I don’t know if the intercom picked it up, but it 



really didn’t matter. 

Mr. Grace was crying. Sobbing like a baby. 

“Satisfactory,” I said to no one in particular. “Very satisfactory.” 

Things seemed to be progressing nicely. 

I let him sob for the best part of a minute; the cops had started toward the school at the 
sound of the shot, but Tom Denver, still betting on his shrink, held them back, and so that 
was all right. Mr. Grace sounded like a very small child, helpless, hopeless. I had made 
him fuck himself with his own big tool, like one of those weird experiences you read 
about in the Penthouse Forum. I had taken off his witch doctor’s mask and made him 
human. But I didn’t hold it against him. To err is only human, but it’s divine to forgive. I 
believe that sincerely. 

“Mr. Grace?” I said finally. 

“I’m going outside now,” he said. And then, with tearful rebelliousness: “And you can’t 
stop me!” 

“That’s all right,” I said tenderly. “The game’s over, Mr. Grace. We weren’t playing for 
keepsies this time. No one is dead down here. I shot into the floor.” 

Breathing silence. Then, tiredly: “How can I believe you, Charlie?” 

Because there would have been a stampede. 

Instead of saying that, I pointed. “Ted?” 

“This is Ted Jones, Mr. Grace,” Ted said mechanically. 

“Y-Yes, Ted.” 

“He shot into the floor,” Ted said in a robot voice. “Everyone is all right.” Then he 
grinned and began to speak again. I pointed the pistol at him, and he shut his mouth with a 
snap. 

“Thank you, Ted. Thank you, my boy.” Mr. Grace began to sob again. After what 
seemed like a long, long time, he shut the intercom off. A long time after that, he came 
into view on the lawn again, walking toward the enclave of cops on the lawn, walking in 
his tweed coat with the suede elbow patches, bald head gleaming, cheeks gleaming. He 
was walking slowly, like an old man. It was amazing how much I liked seeing him walk 
like that. 



Chapter 20 


“Oh, man,” Richard Keene said from the back of the room, and his voice sounded tired 
and sighing, almost exhausted. 

That was when a small, savagely happy voice broke in: “I thought it was great!” I craned 
my neck around. It was a tiny Dutch doll of a girl named Grace Stanner. She was pretty in 
a way that attracted the shop-course boys, who still slicked their hair back and wore white 
socks. They hung around her in the hall like droning bees. She wore tight sweaters and 
short skirts. When she walked, everything jiggled-as Chuck Berry has said in his wisdom, 
it’s such a sight to see somebody steal the show. Her mom was no prize, from what I 
understood. She was sort of a pro-am barfly and spent most of her time hanging around at 
Denny’s on South Main, about a half-mile up from what they call the corner here in 
Placerville. Denny’s will never be mistaken for Caesar’s Palace. And there are always a lot 
of small minds in small towns, eager to think like mother, like daughter. Now she was 
wearing a pink cardigan sweater and a dark green skirt, thigh-high. Her face was alight, 
elvish. She had raised one clenched fist unconsciously shoulder-high. And there was 
something crystal and poignant about the moment. I actually felt my throat tighten. 

“Go, Charlie! Fuck ‘em all!” 

A lot of heads snapped around and a lot of mouths dropped open, but I wasn’t too 
surprised. I told you about the roulette ball, didn’t I? Sure I did. In some ways-in a lot of 
ways-it was still in spin. Craziness is only a matter of degree, and there are lots of people 
besides me who have the urge to roll heads. They go to the stockcar races and the horror 
movies and the wrestling matches they have in the Portland Expo. Maybe what she said 
smacked of all those things, but I admired her for saying it out loud, all the same-the price 
of honesty is always high. She had an admirable grasp of the fundamentals. Besides, she 
was tiny and pretty. 

Irma Bates wheeled on her, face stretched with outrage. It suddenly struck me that what 
was happening to Irma must be nearly cataclysmic. “Dirty-mouth!” 

“Fuck you, too!” Grace shot back at her, smiling. Then, as an afterthought: “Bag!” 

Irma’s mouth dropped open. She struggled for words; I could see her throat working as 
she tried them, rejected them, tried more, looking for the words of power that would line 
Grace’s face, drop her breasts four inches toward her belly, pop up varicose veins on those 
smooth thighs, and turn her hair gray. Surely those words were there someplace, and it 
was only a matter of finding them. So she struggled, and with her low-slung chin and 
bulging forehead (both generously sprinkled with blackheads), she looked like a frog. 

She finally sprayed out: “They ought to shoot you, just like they’ll shoot him, you slut!” 
She worked for more; it wasn’t enough. It couldn’t yet express all the horror and outrage 
she felt for this violent rip in the seam of her universe. “Kill all sluts. Sluts and sluts’ 
daughters!” 

The room had been quiet, but now it became absolutely silent. A pool of silence. A 
mental spotlight had been switched on Irma and Grace. They might have been alone in a 



pool of light on a huge stage. Up to this last, Grace had been smiling slightly. Now the 
smile was wiped off. 

“What?” Grace asked slowly. “What? What?” 

“Baggage! Tramp!” 

Grace stood up, as if about to recite poetry. “My mother-works-in-a-laundry-you-fat- 
bitch-and-you-better-take-back-what-you-j ust-said! ” 

Irma’s eyes rolled in caged and desperate triumph. Her neck was slick and shiny with 
sweat: the anxious sweat of the adolescent damned, the ones who sit home Friday nights 
and watch old movies on TV and also the clock. The ones for whom the phone is always 
mute and the voice of the mother is the voice of Thor. The ones who peck endlessly at the 
mustache shadow between nose and upper lip. The ones who go to see Robert Redford 
with their girlfriends and then come back alone on another day to see him again, with their 
palms clutched damply in their laps. The ones who agonize over long, seldom-mailed 
letters to John Travolta, written by the close, anxious light of Tensor study lamps. The 
ones for whom time has become a slow and dreamy sledge of doom, bringing only empty 
rooms and the smell of old sweats. Sure, that neck was slimy with sweat. I wouldn’t kid 
you, any more than I would myself. 

She opened her mouth and brayed: “WHORE’S DAUGHTER!” 

“Okay,” Grace said. She had started up the aisle toward Irma, holding her hands out in 
front of her like a stage hypnotist’s. She had very long fingernails, lacquered the color of 
pearl. “I’m going to claw your eyes out, cunt.” 

“Whore’s daughter, whore’s daughter!” She was almost singing it. 

Grace smiled. Her eyes were still alight and elvish. She wasn’t hurrying up that aisle, but 
she wasn’t lagging, either. No. She was coming right along. She was pretty, as I had never 
noticed before, pretty and precious. It was as if she had become a secret cameo of herself. 

“Okay, Irma, ” she said. “Here I come. Here I come for your eyes.” 

Irma suddenly aware, shrank back in her seat. 

“Stop,” I said to Grace. I didn’t pick up the pistol, but I laid my hand on it. 

Grace stopped and looked at me inquiringly. Irma looked relieved and also vindicated, 
as if I had taken on aspects of a justly intervening god. “Whore’s daughter,” she confided 
to the class in general. “Missus Stanner has open house every night, just as soon as she 
gets back from the beerjoint. With her as practicing apprentice.” She smiled sickly at 
Grace, a smile that was supposed to convey a superficial, cutting sympathy, and instead 
only inscribed her own pitiful empty terror. Grace was still looking at me inquiringly. 

“Irma?” I asked politely. “Can I have your attention, Irma?” 

And when she looked at me, I saw fully what was happening. Her eyes had a glittery yet 
opaque sheen. Her face was flushed of cheek but waxy of brow. She looked like 
something you might send your kid out wearing for Halloween. She was blowing up. The 
whole thing had offended whatever shrieking albino bat it was that passed for her soul. 

She was ready to go straight up to heaven or dive-bomb down into hell. 



“Good,” I said when both of them were looking at me. “Now. We have to keep order 
here. I’m sure you understand that. Without order, what do you have? The jungle. And the 
best way to keep order is to settle our difficulties in a civilized way. “ 

“Hear, hear!” Harmon Jackson said. 

I got up, went to the blackboard, and took a piece of chalk from the ledge. Then I drew a 
large circle on the tiled floor, perhaps five feet through the middle. I kept a close eye on 
Ted Jones while I did it, too. Then I went back to the desk and sat down. 

I gestured to the circle. “Please, girls.” 

Grace came forward quickly, precious and perfect. Her complexion was smooth and fair. 

Irma sat stony. 

“Irma, ” I said. “Now, Irma. You’ve made accusations, you know.” 

Irma looked faintly surprised, as if the idea of accusations had exploded an entirely new 
train of thought in her mind. She nodded and rose from her seat with one hand cupped 
demurely over her mouth, as if to stifle a tiny, coquettish giggle. She stepped mincingly up 
the aisle and into the circle, standing as far away from Grace as was possible, eyes cast 
demurely down, hands linked together at her waist. She looked ready to sing “Granada” 
on The Gong Show. 

I thought randomly: Her father sells cars, doesn’t he? 

“Very good,” I said. “Now, as has been hinted at in church, in school, and even on 
Howdy Doody, a single step outside the circle means death. Understood?” 

They understood that. They all understood it. This is not the same as comprehension, but 
it was good enough. When you stop to think, the whole idea of comprehension has a 
faintly archaic taste, like the sound of forgotten tongues or a look into a Victorian camera 
obscura. We Americans are much higher on simple understanding. It makes it easier to 
read the billboards when you’re heading into town on the expressway at plus-fifty. To 
comprehend, the mental jaws have to gape wide enough to make the tendons creak. 
Understanding, however, can be purchased on every paperback-book rack in America. 

“Now, ” I said. “I would like a minimum of physical violence here. We already have 
enough of that to think about. I think your mouths and your open hands will be sufficient, 
girls. I will be the judge. Accepted?” 

They nodded. 

I reached into my back pocket and brought out my red bandanna. I had bought it at the 
Ben Franklin five-and-dime downtown, and a couple of times I had worn it to school 
knotted around my neck, very continental, but I had gotten tired of the effect and put it to 
work as a snot rag. Bourgeois to the core, that’s me. 

“When I drop it, you go at it. First lick to you, Grace, as you seem to be the defendant. “ 

Grace nodded brightly. There were roses in her cheeks. That’s what my mother always 
says about someone who has high color. 

Irma Bates just looked demurely at my red bandanna. 



“Stop it!” Ted Jones snapped. “You said you weren’t going to hurt anyone, Charlie. 

Now, stop it!” His eyes looked desperate. “Just stop it!” 

For no reason I could fathom, Don Lordi laughed crazily. 

“She started it, Ted Jones,” Sylvia Ragan said heatedly. “If some Ethiopian jug-diddler 
called my mother a whore-” 

“Whore, dirty whore,” Irma agreed demurely. 

” ... I’d claw her fuggin’ eyes out!” 

“You’re crazy!” Ted bellowed at her, his face the color of old brick. “We could stop him! 
If we all got together, we could-” 

“Shut up, Ted,” Dick Keene said. “Okay?” 

Ted looked around, saw he had neither support nor sympathy, and shut up. His eyes were 
dark and full of crazy hate. I was glad it was a good long run between his desk and Mrs. 
Underwood’s. I could shoot him in the foot if I had to. 

“Ready, girls?” 

Grace Stanner grinned a healthy, gutsy grin. “All ready.” 

Irma nodded. She was a big girl, standing with her legs apart and her head slightly 
lowered. Her hair was a dirty blond color, done in round curls that looked like toilet-paper 
rolls. 

I dropped my bandanna. It was on. 

Grace stood thinking about it. I could almost see her realizing how deep it could be, 
wondering maybe how far in over her head she wanted to get. In that instant I loved her. 
No ... I loved them both. 

“You’re a fat, bigmouth bitch,” Grace said, looking Irma in the eye. “You stink. I mean 
that. Your body stinks. You’re a louse.” 

“Good,” I said, when she was done. “Give her a smack.” 

Grace hauled off and slapped the side of Irma’s face. It made a flat whapping noise, like 
one board striking another. Her sweater pulled up above the waistband of her skirt with the 
swing of her arm. 

Corky Herald went “Unhh!” under his breath. 

Irma let out a whoofing grunt. Her head snapped back, her face screwed up. She didn’t 
look demure anymore. There was a large, hectic patch on her left cheek. 

Grace threw back her head, drew a sudden knife-breath, and stood ready. Her hair 
spilled over her shoulders, beautiful and perfect. She waited. 

“Irma for the prosecution,” I said. “Go ahead, Irma. “ 

Irma was breathing heavily. Her eyes were glazed and offended, her mouth horrified. At 
that moment she looked like no one’s sweet child of morning. 

“Whore,” she said finally, apparently deciding to stick with a winner. Her lip lifted, fell, 
and lifted again, like a dog’s. “Dirty boy-fucking whore.” 



I nodded to her. 

Irma grinned. She was very big. Her arm, coming around, was like a wall. It rocketed 
against the side of Grace’s face. The sound was a sharp crack. 

“Ow!” someone whined. 

Grace didn’t fall over. The whole side of her face went red, but she didn’t fall over. 
Instead, she smiled at Irma. And Irma flinched. I saw it and could hardly believe it: 
Dracula had feet of clay, after all. 

I snatched a quick look at the audience. They were hung, hypnotized. They weren’t 
thinking about Mr. Grace or Tom Denver or Charles Everett Decker. They were watching, 
and maybe what they saw was a little bit of their own souls, flashed at them in a cracked 
mirror. It was fine. It was like new grass in spring. 

“Rebuttal, Grace?” I asked. 

Grace’s lips drew back from her tiny ivory teeth. “You never had a date, that’s what’s the 
matter with you. You’re ugly. You smell bad. And so all you think about is what other 
people do, and you have to make it all dirty in your mind. You’re a bug.” 

I nodded to her. 

Grace swung, and Irma shied away. The blow struck her only glancingly, but she began 
to weep with a sudden, slow hopelessness. “Let me out,” she groaned. “I don’t want to any 
more, Charlie. Let me out! “ 

“Take back what you said about my mother,” Grace said grimly. 

“Your mother sucks cocks!” Irma screamed. Her face was twisted; her toilet-roll curls 
bobbed madly. 

“Good,” I said. “Go ahead, Irma.” 

But Irma was weeping hysterically. “J-J-J e-Jesusss ... “ she screamed. Her arms came 
up and covered her face with terrifying slowness. “God I want to be d-dd-dead ... “ 

“Say you’re sorry,” Grace said grimly. “Take it back.” 

“You suck cocks! ” Irma screamed from behind the barricade of her arms. 

“Okay,” I said. “Let her have it, Irma. Last chance.” 

This time Irma swung from the heels. I saw Grace’s eyes squeeze into slits, saw the 
muscles of her neck tighten into cords. But the angle of her jaw caught most of the blow 
and her head shifted only slightly. Still, that whole side of her face was bright red, as if 
from sunburn. 

Irma’s whole body jogged and jiggled with the force of her sobs, which seemed to come 
from a deep well in her that had never been tapped before. 

“You haven’t got nothing,” Grace said. “You ain’t nothing. Just a fat, stinky pig is what 
you are. “ 

“Hey, give it to her!” Billy Sawyer yelled. He slammed both fists down heavily on his 
desk. “Hey, pour it on!” 



“You ain’t even got any friends, ” Grace said, breathing hard. “Why do you even bother 
living?” 

Irma let out a thin, reedy wail. 

“All done,” Grace said to me. 

“Okay,” I said. “Give it to her.” 

Grace drew back, and Irma screamed and went to her knees. “Don’t h-h-hit me. Don’t 
hit me no more! Don’t you hit me-” 

“Say you’re sorry.” 

“I can’t,” she wept. “Don’t you know Ican’t?” 

“You can. You better.” 

There was no sound for a moment, but the vague buzz of the wall clock. Then Irma 
looked up, and Grace’s hand came down fast, amazingly fast, making a small, ladylike 
splat against Irma’s cheek. It sounded like a shot from a .22. 

Irma fell heavily on one hand, her curls hanging in her face. She drew in a huge, ragged 
breath and screamed, “Okay! All right! I’m sorry!” 

Grace stepped back, her mouth half-open and moist, breathing rapidly and shallowly. 

She raised her hands, palms out, in a curiously dove-like gesture, and pushed her hair 
away from her cheeks. Irma looked up at her dumbly, unbelievingly. She struggled to her 
knees again, and for a moment I thought she was going to offer a prayer to Grace. Then 
she began to weep. 

Grace looked at the class, then looked at me. Her breasts were very full, pushing at the 
soft fabric of her sweater. 

“My mother fucks,” she said, “and I love her.” 

The applause started somewhere in the back, maybe with Mike Gavin or Nancy Caskin. 
But it started and spread until they were all applauding, all but Ted Jones and Susan 
Brooks. Susan looked too overwhelmed to applaud. She was looking at Gracie Stanner 
shiningly. 

Irma knelt on the floor, her face in her hands. When the applause died (I had looked at 
Sandra Cross; she applauded very gently, as if in a dream), I said, “Stand up, Irma. “ 

She looked at me wonderingly, her face streaked and shadowed and ravaged, as if she 
had been in a dream herself. 

“Leave her alone,” Ted said, each word distinct. 

“Shut up,” Harmon Jackson said. “Charlie is doing all right.” 

Ted turned around in his seat and looked at him. But Harmon did not drop his eyes, as he 
might have done at another place, another time. They were both on the Student Council 
together-where Ted, of course, had always been the power. 

“Stand up, Irma,” I said gently. 

“Are you going to shoot me?” she whispered. 



“You said you were sorry.” 

“She made me say it. “ 

“But I bet you are.” 

Irma looked at me dumbly from beneath the madhouse of her toilet-paper-roll curls. 

“I’ve always been sorry,” she said. “That’s what makes it s-s-s-so hard to s-say.” 

“Do you forgive her?” I asked Grace. 

“Huh?” Grace looked at me, a little dazed. “Oh. Yeah. Sure.” She walked suddenly back 
to her seat and sat down, where she looked frowningly at her hands. 

“Irma?” I said. 

“What?” She was peering at me, doglike, truculent, fearful, pitiful. 

“Do you have something you want to say?” 

“I don’t know.” 

She stood up a little at a time. Her hands dangled strangely, as if she didn’t know exactly 
what to do with them. 

“I think you do. “ 

“You’ll feel better when it’s off your chest, Irma, ” Tanis Gannon said. “I always do. “ 

“Leave her alone, fa Chrissake,” Dick Keene said from the back of the room. 

“I don’t want to be let alone,” Irma said suddenly. “I want to say it.” She brushed back 
her hair defiantly. Her hands were not dove-like at all. “I’m not pretty. No one likes me. I 
never had a date. Everything she said is true. There.” The words rushed out very fast, and 
she screwed up her face while she was saying them, as if she were taking nasty medicine. 

“Take a little care of yourself, ” Tanis said. Then, looking embarrassed but still 
determined: “You know, wash, shave your legs and, uh, armpits. Look nice. I’m no raving 
beauty, but I don’t stay home every weekend. You could do it.” 

“I don’t know how!” 

Some of the boys were beginning to look uneasy, but the girls were leaning forward. 
They looked sympathetic now, all of them. They had that confessions-at-the-pajama-party 
look that every male seems to know and dread. 

“Well ...” Tanis began. Then she stopped and shook her head. “Come back here and sit 
down. “ 

Pat Fitzgerald snickered. “Trade secrets?” 

“That’s right.” 

“Some trade,” Corky Herald said. That got laughs. Irma Bates shuttled to the back of the 
room, where she, Tanis, Anne Lasky, and Susan Brooks started some sort of 
confabulation. Sylvia was talking softly with Grace, and Pig Pen’s eyes were crawling 
avidly over both of them. Ted Jones was frowning at the air. George Yannick was carving 
something on the top of his desk and smoking a cigarette-he looked like any busy 
carpenter. Most of the other; were looking out the windows at the cops directing traffic 



and conferring in desperate-looking little huddles. I could pick out Don Grace, good old 
Tom Denver, and Jerry Kesserling, the traffic cop. 

A bell went off suddenly with a loud bray, making all of us jump. It made the cops 
outside jump, too. A couple of them pulled their guns. 

“Change-of-classes bell,” Harmon said. 

I looked at the wall clock. It was 9:50. At 9:05 I had been sitting in my seat by the 
window, watching the squirrel. Now the squirrel was gone, good old Tom Denver was 
gone, and Mrs. Underwood was really gone. I thought it over and decided I was gone, too. 



Chapter 21 


Three more state-police cars came, and also a number of citizens from town. The cops 
tried to shoo them away, with greater or lesser degrees of success. Mr. Frankel, owner and 
proprietor of Frankel’s Jewelry Store & Camera Shop, drove up in his new Pontiac 
Firebird and jawed for quite a while with Jerry Kesserling. He pushed his horn-rimmed 
glasses up on his nose constantly as he talked. Jerry was trying to get rid of him, but Mr. 
Frankel wasn’t having any of it. He was also Placerville’s second selectman and a crony of 
Norman Jones, Ted’s father. 

“My mother got me a ring in his store,” Sarah Pasterne said, looking at Ted from the 
corner of her eye. “It greened my finger the first day.” 

“My mother says he’s a gyp,” Tanis said. 

“Hey!” Pig Pen gulped. “There’s my mother!” 

We all looked. Sure enough, there was Mrs. Dano talking with one of the state troopers, 
her slip hanging a quarter of an inch below the hem of her dress. She was one of those 
ladies who do fifty percent of their talking with their hands. They fluttered and whipped 
like flags, and it made me think of autumn Saturdays on the gridiron, somehow: holding 
... clipping ... illegal tackle. I guess in this case you’d have to say it was illegal holding. 

We all knew her by sight as well as by reputation; she headed up a lot of PTA functions 
and was a member in good standing of the Mothers Club. Go out to a baked-bean supper 
to benefit the class trip, or to the Sadie Hawkins dance in the gym, or to the senior outing, 
and you’d be apt to find Mrs. Dano at the door, ready with the old glad hand, grinning like 
there was no tomorrow, and collecting bits of information the way frogs catch flies. 

Pig Pen shifted nervously in his seat, as if he might have to go to the bathroom. 

“Hey, Pen, your mudda’s callin’,” Jack Goldman intoned from the back of the room. 

“Let her call,” Pig Pen muttered. 

The Pen had an older sister, Lilly Dano, who was a senior when we were all freshmen. 
She had a face that looked a lot like Pig Pen’s, which made her nobody’s candidate for 
Teen Queen. A hook-nosed junior named LaFollet St. Armand began squiring her about, 
and then knocked her up higher than a kite. LaFollet joined the Marines, where they 
presumably taught him the difference between his rifle and his gun-which was for 
shooting and which was for fun. Mrs. Dano appeared at no PTA functions for the next two 
months. Lilly was packed off to an aunt in Boxford, Massachusetts. Shortly after that, 

Mrs. Dano returned to the same old stand, grinning harder than ever. It’s a small-town 
classic, friends. 

“She must be really worried about you,” Carol Granger said. 

“Who cares?” Pig Pen asked indifferently. Sylvia Ragan smiled at him. Pig Pen blushed. 

Nobody said anything for a while. We watched the townspeople mill around beyond the 
bright yellow crash barricades that were going up. I saw some other mums and dads 



among them. I didn’t see Sandra’s mother and father, and I didn’t see big Joe McKennedy. 
Hey, I didn’t really expect he’d show up, anyway. Circuses have never been our style. 

A newsmobile from WGAN-TV pulled up. One of the guys got out, patting his process 
neatly into place, and jawed with a cop. The cop pointed across the road. The guy with the 
process went back to the newsmobile, and two more guys got out and started unloading 
camera equipment. 

“Anybody here got a transistor radio?” I asked. 

Three of them raised hands. Corky’s was the biggest, a Sony twelve transistor that he 
carried in his briefcase. It got six bands, including TV, shortwave, and CB. He put it on his 
desk and turned it on. We were just in time for the ten-o’clock report: 

“Topping the headlines, a Placerville High School senior, Charles Everett Decker ... “ 

“Everett!” Somebody snickered. 

“Shut up,” Ted said curtly. 

Pat Fitzgerald stuck out his tongue. 

”... apparently went berserk early this morning and is now holding twenty-four 
classmates hostage in a classroom of that high school. One person, Peter Vance, thirty- 
seven, a history teacher at Placerville, is known dead. Another teacher, Mrs. Jean 
Underwood, also thirty-seven, is feared dead. Decker has commandeered the intercom 
system and has communicated twice with school authorities. The list of hostages is as 
follows ... “ 

He read down the class list as I had given it to Tom Denver. “I’m on the radio! ” Nancy 
Caskin exclaimed when they reached her name. She blinked and smiled tentatively. 

Melvin Thomas whistled. Nancy colored and told him to shut up. 

”... and George Yannick. Frank Philbrick, head of the Maine State Police, has asked 
that all friends and family stay away from the scene. Decker is presumed dangerous, and 
Philbrick emphasized that nobody knows at this time what might set him off. ‘We have to 
assume that the boy is still on a hair trigger,’ Philbrick said.” 

“Want to pull my trigger?” I asked Sylvia. 

“Is your safety on?” she asked right back, and the class roared. Anne Lasky laughed 
with her hands over her mouth, blushing a deep bright red. Ted Jones, our practicing party 
poop, scowled. 

”... Grace, Placerville’s psychiatrist and guidance counselor, talked to Decker over the 
intercom system only minutes ago. Grace told reporters that Decker threatened to kill 
someone in the classroom if Grace did not leave the upstairs office immediately.” 

“Liar!” Grace Stanner said musically. Irma jumped a little. 

“Who does he think he is?” Melvin asked angrily. “Does he think he can get away with 
that shit?” 

” . also said that he considers Decker to be a schizophrenic personality, possibly past the 
point of anything other than borderline rationality. Grace concluded his hurried remarks by 



saying: ‘At this point, Charles Decker might conceivably do anything.’ Police from the 
surrounding towns of “ 

“Whatta crocka shit!” Sylvia blared. “I’m gonna tell those guys what really went down 
with that guy when we get outta here! I’m gonna-” 

“Shut up and listen!” Dick Keene snapped at her. 

” . and Lewiston have been summoned to the scene. At this moment, according to 
Captain Philbrick, the situation is at an impasse. Decker has sworn to kill if tear gas is 
used, and with the lives of twenty-four children at stake ... “ 

“Children, ” Pig Pen said suddenly. “Children this and children that. They stabbed you 
in the back, Charlie. Already. Children. Ha. Shit. What do they think is happening? I-” 

“He’s saying something about-” Corky began. 

“Never mind. Turn it off, ” I said. “This sounds more interesting. ” I fixed the Pen with 
my best steely gaze. “What seems to be on yore mind, pal?” 

Pig Pen jerked his thumb at Irma. “She thinks she’s got it bad,” he said. “Her. Heh. ” He 
laughed a sudden, erratic laugh. For no particular reason I could make out, he removed a 
pencil from his breast pocket and looked at it. It was a purple pencil. 

“Be-Bop pencil,” Pig Pen said. “Cheapest pencils on the face of the earth, that’s what I 
think. Can’t sharpen ‘em at all. Lead breaks. Every September since I started first grade 
Ma comes home from the Mammoth Mart with two hundred Be-Bop pencils in a plastic 
box. And I use ‘em, Jesus.” 

He snapped his purple pencil between his thumbs and stared at it. To tell the truth, I did 
think it looked like a pretty cheap pencil. I’ve always used the Eberhard Faber myself. 

“Ma, ” Pig Pen said. “That’s Ma for you. Two hundred Be-Bop pencils in a plastic box. 
You know what her big thing is? Besides all those shitty suppers where they give you a 
big plate of Hamburger Helper and a paper cup of orange Jell-0 full of grated carrots? 
Huh? She enters contests. That’s her hobby. Hundreds of contests. All the time. She 
subscribes to all the women’s magazines and enters the sweepstakes. Why she likes Rinso 
for all her dainty things in twenty-five words or less. My sister had a kitten once, and Ma 
wouldn’t even let her keep it. “ 

“She the one who got pregnant?” Corky asked. 

“Wouldn’t even let her keep it,” Pig Pen said. “Drownded it in the bathtub when no one 
would take it. Lilly begged her to at least take it to the vet so it could have gas, and Ma 
said four bucks for gas was too much to spend on a worthless kitten. “ 

“Oh, poor thing,” Susan Brooks said. 

“I swear to God, she did it right in the bathtub. All those goddamn pencils. Will she buy 
me a new shirt? Huh? Maybe for my birthday. I say, ‘Ma, you should hear what the kids 
call me. Ma, for Lord’s sake.’ I don’t even get an allowance, she says she needs it for 
postage so she can enter her contests. A new shirt for my birthday and a shitload of Be- 
Bop pencils in a plastic box to take back to school. I tried to get a paper route once, and 
she put a stop to that. She said there were women of loose virtue who laid in wait for 



young boys after their husbands went to work. “ 

“Oh, my Gawwd!” Sylvia bellowed. 

“And contests. And PTA suppers. And chaperoning dances. Grabbing on to everybody. 
Sucking up to them and grinning.” 

He looked at me and smiled the oddest smile I had seen all day. And that was going 
some. 

“You know what she said when Lilly had to go away? She said I’d have to sell my car. 
That old Dodge my uncle gave me when I got my driver’s license. I said I wouldn’t. I said 
Uncle Fred gave it to me and I was going to keep it. She said if I wouldn’t sell it, she 
would. She’d signed all the papers, and legally it was hers. She said I wasn’t going to get 
any girl pregnant in the back seat. Me. Get a girl pregnant in the back seat. That’s what she 
said. “ 

He brandished a broken pencil half. The lead poked out of the wood like a black bone. 
“Me. Hah. The last date I had was for the eighth-grade class picnic. I told Ma I wouldn’t 
sell the Dodge. She said I would. I ended up selling it. I knew I would. I can’t fight her. 

She always knows what to say. You start giving her a reason why you can’t sell your car, 
and she says: 'Then how come you stay in the bathroom so long?’ Right off the wall. 
You’re talking about the car, and she’s talking about the bathroom. Like you’re doing 
something dirty in there. She grinds you. ” He stared out the window. Mrs. Dano was no 
longer in sight. “She grinds and grinds and grinds, and she always beats you. Be-Bop 
pencils that break every time you try to sharpen them. That’s how she beats you. That’s 
how she grinds you down. And she’s so mean and stupid, she drownded the kitty, just a 
little kitty, and she’s so stupid that you know everybody laughs at her behind her back. So 
what does that make me? Littler and stupider. After a while you feel just like a little kitty 
that crawled into a plastic box full of Be-Bop pencils and got brought home by mistake.” 
The room was dead quiet. Pig Pen had center stage. I don’t think he knew it. He looked 
grubby and pissed off, fists clenched around his broken pencil halves. Outside, a cop had 
driven a police cruiser onto the lawn. He parked it parallel to the school, and a few more 
cops ran down behind it, presumably to do secret things. They had riot guns in their hands. 
“I don’t think I’d mind if she snuffed it,” Pig Pen said, grinning a small, horrified grin. “I 
wish I had your stick, Charlie. If I had your stick, I think I’d kill her myself. “ 

“You’re crazy, too,” Ted said worriedly. “God, you’re all going crazy right along with 
him. “ 

“Don’t be such a creep, Ted. ” It was Carol Granger. In a way, it was surprising not to 
find her on Ted’s side. I knew he had taken her out a few times before she started with her 
current steady, and bright establishment types usually stick together. Still, it had been she 
who had dropped him. To make a very clumsy analogy, I was beginning to suspect that 
Ted was to my classmates what Eisenhower must always have been to the dedicated 
liberals of the fifties-you had to like him, that style, that grin, that record, those good 
intentions, but there was something exasperating and a tiny bit slimy about him. You can 
see I’m fixated on Ted... 

Why not? I’m still trying to figure him out. Sometimes it seems that everything that 



happened on that long morning is just something I imagined, or some half-baked writer’s 
fantasy. But it did happen. And sometimes, now, it seems to me that Ted was at the center 
of it all, not me. It seems that Ted goaded them all into people they were not ... or into the 
people they really were. All I know for sure is that Carol was looking at him defiantly, not 
like a demure valedictorian-to-be due to speak on the problems of the black race. She 
looked angry and a wee bit cruel. 

When I think about the Eisenhower administration, I think about the U-2 incident. When 
I think about that funny morning, I think about the sweat patches that were slowly 
spreading under the arms of Ted’s khaki shirt. 

“When they drag him off, they won’t find anything but nut cases,” Ted was saying. He 
looked mistrustfully at Pig Pen, who was glaring sweatily at the halves of his Be-Bop 
pencil as if they were the only things left in the world. His neck was grimy, but what the 
hell. Nobody was talking about his neck. 

“They grind you down, ” he whispered. He threw the pencil halves on the floor. He 
looked at them, then looked up at me. His face was strange and grief-stunned. It made me 
uncomfortable. “They’ll grind you down, too, Charlie. Wait and see if they don’t. “ 

There was an uncomfortable silence in the room. I was holding on to the pistol very 
tightly. Without thinking about it much, I took out the box of shells and put three of them 
in, filling the magazine again. The handgrip was sweaty. I suddenly realized I had been 
holding it by the barrel, pointing it at myself, not looking at them. No one had made a 
break. Ted was sort of hunched over his desk, hands gripping the edge, but he hadn’t 
moved, except in his head. I suddenly thought that touching his skin would be like 
touching an alligator handbag. I wondered if Carol had ever kissed him, touched him. 
Probably had. The thought made me want to puke. 

Susan Brooks suddenly burst into tears. 

Nobody looked at her. I looked at them, and they looked at me. I had been holding the 
pistol by the barrel. They knew it. They had seen it. 

I moved my feet, and one of them kicked Mrs. Underwood. I looked down at her. She 
had been wearing a casual tartan coat over a brown cashmere sweater. She was beginning 
to stiffen. Her skin probably felt like an alligator handbag. Rigor, you know. I had left a 
footmark on her sweater at some point in time. For some reason, that made me think of a 
picture I had once seen of Ernest Hemingway, standing with one foot on a dead lion and a 
rifle in his hand and half a dozen grinning black bearers in the background. I suddenly 
needed to scream. I had taken her life, I had snuffed her, put a bullet in her head and 
spilled out algebra. 

Susan Brooks had put her head down on her desk, the way they used to make us do in 
kindergarten when it was nap time. She was wearing a powder-blue scarf in her hair. It 
looked very pretty. My stomach hurt. 

“DECKER! “ 

I cried out and jerked the pistol around toward the windows. It was a state trooper with a 
battery-powered bullhorn. Up on the hill, the newsmen were grinding away with their 



cameras. Just grinding away-Pig Pen hadn’t been so far wrong, at that. 

“COME OUT, DECKER, WITH YOUR HANDS UP!” 

“Let me be,” I said. 

My hands had begun to tremble. My stomach really did hurt. I’ve always had a lousy 
stomach. Sometimes I’d get the dry heaves before I went to school in the morning, or 
when I was taking a girl out for the first time. Once, Joe and I took a couple of girls down 
to Harrison State Park. It was July, warm and very beautiful. The sky had a dim, very high 
haze. The girl I was with was named Annmarie. She spelled it all one name. She was very 
pretty. She wore dark green corduroy shorts and a silk pullover blouse. She had a beach 
bag. We were going down Route 1 toward Bath, the radio on and playing good rock ‘n’ 
roll. Brian Wilson, I remember that, Brian Wilson and the Beach Boys. And Joe was 
driving his old blue Mercury-he used to call it De Blue Frawwwg and then grin his Joe 
McKennedy grin. All the vents were open. I got sick to my stomach. It was very bad. Joe 
was talking to his girl. They were talking about surfing, which was certainly compatible 
with the Beach Boys on the radio. She was a fine-looking girl. Her name was Rosalynn. 
She was Annmarie’s sister. I opened my mouth to say I felt sick, and puked all over the 
floor. Some of it got on Annmarie’s leg, and the look on her face, you couldn’t imagine it. 
Or maybe you could. They all tried to make light of it, brush it off. I let all my guys puke 
on me on the first date, ha-ha. I couldn’t go in swimming that day. My stomach felt too 
bad. Annmarie sat on the blanket next to me most of the time and got a burn. The girls had 
packed a picnic lunch. I drank a soda, but I couldn’t eat any of the sandwiches. I was 
thinking about Joe’s blue Mere, standing in the sun all day, and how it was going to smell 
going home. The late Lenny Bruce once said you can’t get snot off a suede jacket, and to 
that I would add one of the other great home truths: you can’t get the smell of vomit out of 
a blue Mercury’s upholstery. It’s there for weeks, for months, maybe years. And it smelled 
just about like I thought it would. Everybody just pretended it wasn’t there. But it was. 

“COME ON OUT, DECKER. WE’RE THROUGH FOOLING AROUND WITH 
YOU!” 

“Stop it! Shut up!” Of course they couldn’t hear me. They didn’t want to. This was their 
game. 

“Don’t like it so well when you can’t talk back, do you?” Ted Jones said. “When you 
can’t play any of your smart games.” 

“Leave me alone.” I sounded suspiciously like I was whining. 

“They’ll wearya out,” Pig Pen said. It was the voice of doom. I tried to think about the 
squirrel, and about the way the lawn grew right up to the building, no fucking around. I 
couldn’t do it. My mind was jackstraws in the wind. The beach that day had been bright 
and hot. Everybody had a transistor radio, all of them tuned to different stations. Joe and 
Rosalynn had body-surfed in glass-green waves. 

“YOU’VE GOT FIVE MINUTES, DECKER!” 

“Go on out,” Ted urged. He was gripping the edge of his desk again. “Go out while 
you’ve got a chance.” 



Sylvia whirled on him. “What have you got to be? Some kind of hero? Why? Why? Shit, 
that’s all you’ll be, Ted Jones. I’ll tell them-” 

“Don’t tell me what-” 

”... wearya down, Charlie, grind ya, wait and-” 

“DECKER!” 

“Go on out, Charlie ... “ 

”... please, can’t you see you’re upsetting him-” 

“DECKER! “ 

“... PTA suppers and all that lousy ... “ 

“... cracking up if you’d just let him DECKER! alone grindya wearya down you go 
Charlie you can’t DON’T WANT TO BE FORCED TO SHOOT until you’re ready leave 
him be Ted if you know what all of you shut up good for you COMEOUT ... “ 

I swung the pistol up at the windows, holding it in both hands, and pulled the trigger 
four times. The reports slammed around the room like bowling balls. Window glass blew 
out in great crackling fistfuls. The troopers dived down out of sight. The cameramen hit 
the gravel. The clot of spectators broke and ran in all directions. Broken glass shone and 
twinkled on the green grass outside like diamonds on show-window velvet, brighter gems 
than any in Mr. Frankel’s store. 

There was no answering fire. They were bluffing. I knew that; it was my stomach, my 
goddamn stomach. What else could they do but bluff? 

Ted Jones was not bluffing. He was halfway to the desk before I could bring the pistol 
around on him. He froze, and I knew he thought I was going to shoot him. He was looking 
right past me into darkness. 

“Sit down,” I said. 

He didn’t move. Every muscle seemed paralyzed. 

“Sit down. “ 

He began to tremble. It seemed to begin in his legs and spread up his trunk and arms and 
neck. It reached his mouth, which began to gibber silently. It climbed to his right cheek, 
which began to twitch. His eyes stayed steady. I have to give him that, and with 
admiration. One of the few things my father says when he’s had a few that I agree with is 
that kids don’t have much balls in this generation. Some of them are trying to start the 
revolution by bombing U.S. government washrooms, but none of them are throwing 
Molotov cocktails at the Pentagon. But Ted’s eyes, even full of darkness, stayed steady. 

“Sit down,” I repeated. 

He went and sat down. 

Nobody in the room had cried out. Several of them had put their hands over their ears. 
Now they took them away carefully, sampling the noise level of the air, testing it. I looked 
for my stomach. It was there. I was in control again. 



The man with the bullhorn was shouting, but this time he wasn’t shouting at me. He was 
telling the people who had been watching from across the road to get out of the area and 
be snappy about it. They were doing it. Many of them ran hunched over, like Richard 
Widmark in a World War II epic. 

A quiet little breeze riffled in through the two broken windows. It caught a paper on 
Harmon Jackson’s desk and fluttered it into the aisle. He leaned over and picked it up. 

Sandra Cross said, “Tell something else, Charlie.” 

I felt a weird smile stretch my lips. I wanted to sing the chorus from that folk song, the 
one about beautiful, beautiful blue eyes, but I couldn’t remember the words and probably 
wouldn’t have dared, anyway. I sing like a duck. So I only looked at her and smiled my 
weird smile. She blushed a little but didn’t drop her eyes. I thought of her married to some 
slob with five two-button suits and fancy pastel toilet paper in the bathroom. It hurt me 
with its inevitability. They all find out sooner or later how unchic it is to pop your buttons 
at the Sadie Hawkins dance, or to crawl into the trunk so you can get into the drive-in for 
free. They stop eating pizza and plugging dimes into the juke down at Fat Sammy’s. They 
stop kissing boys in the blueberry patch. And they always seem to end up looking like the 
Barbie doll cutouts in Jack and Jill magazine. Fold in at Slot A, Slot B, and Slot C. Watch 
Her Grow Old Before Your Very Eyes. For a second I thought I might actually turn on the 
waterworks, but I avoided that indignity by wondering if she was wearing white panties 
today. 

It was 10:20.1 said: 



Chapter 22 


I was twelve when Mom got me the corduroy suit. By that time Dad had pretty much 
given up on me and I was my mother’s responsibility. I wore the suit to church on Sundays 
and to Bible meetings on Thursday nights. With my choice of three snap-on bow ties. 
Rooty-toot. 

But I hadn’t expected her to try and make me wear it to that goddamn birthday party. I 
tried everything. I reasoned with her. I threatened not to go. I even tried a lie-told her the 
party was off because Carol had the chickenpox. One call to Carol’s mother set that 
straight. Nothing worked. Mom let me run pretty much as I pleased most of the time, but 
when she got an idea solid in her mind, you were stuck with it. Listen to this: for 
Christmas one year, my dad’s brother gave her this weird jigsaw puzzle. I think Uncle 
Tom was in collusion with my dad on that one. She did a lot of jigsaws-I helped-and they 
both thought it was the biggest waste of time on earth. So Tom sent her a five-hundred- 
piece jigsaw puzzle that had a single blueberry down in the lower-right-hand corner. The 
rest of the puzzle was solid white, no shades. My father laughed his ass off. “Let’s see you 
do that one, Mother,” he said. He always called her “Mother” when he felt a good one had 
been put over on her, and it never ceased to irritate her. She sat down on Christmas 
afternoon and spread the puzzle out on her puzzle table in her bedroom-by this time they 
each had their own. There were TV dinners and pickup lunches for Dad and I on 
December twenty-sixth and the twenty-seventh, but on the morning of the twenty-eighth, 
the puzzle was done. She took a Polaroid picture of it to send to Uncle Tom, who lives in 
Wisconsin. Then she took the puzzle apart and put it away in the attic. That was two years 
ago, and so far as I know, it’s still there. But she did it. My mother is a humorous, literate, 
pleasant person. She is kind to animals and accordion-playing mendicants. But you didn’t 
cross her, or she could dig in her heels ... usually somewhere in the groin area. 

I was crossing her. I was, in fact, starting to run through my arguments for the fourth 
time that day, but time had just about tun out. The bow tie was clutching my collar like a 
pink spider with hidden steel legs, the coat was too tight, and she’d even made me put on 
my square-toed shoes, which were my Sunday best. My father wasn’t there, he was down 
at Gogan’s slopping up a few with his good buddies, but if he’d been around he would 
have said I looked “squared away.” I didn’t feel like an asshole. 

“Listen, Mother-' 

“I don’t want to hear any more about it, Charlie. ” I didn’t want to hear any more about 
it either, but since I was the one running for the Shithead of the Year Award, and not her, I 
felt obliged to give it the old school grunt. 

“All I’m trying to tell you is that nobody is going to be wearing a suit to that party, 

Mom. I called up Joe McKennedy this morning, and he said he was just going to wear-” 

“Just shut up about it,” she said, very soft, and I did. When my mother says “shut up,” 
she’s really mad. She didn’t learn “shut up” reading The Guardian. “Shut up, or you won’t 
be going anywhere.” 



But I knew what that meant. “Not going anywhere” would apply to a lot more than 
Carol Granger’s party. It would probably mean movies, the Harlow rec center, and 
swimming classes for the next month. Mom is quiet, but she carries a grudge when she 
doesn’t get her way. I remembered the jigsaw puzzle, which had borne the whimsical title 
“Last Berry in the Patch.” That puzzle had crossed her, and it hadn’t been out of the attic 
for the last two years. And if you have to know, and maybe some of you do anyway, I had 
a little crush on Carol. I’d bought her a snot-rag with her initials on it and wrapped it 
myself. Mom offered, but I said no. It wasn’t any lousy fifteen-cent hankie, either. Those 
babies were going in the Lewiston J. C. Penney’s for fifty-nine cents, and it had lace all 
the way around the edge. 

“Okay.” I grumped at her. “Okay, okay, okay.” 

“And don’t you wise-mouth me, Charlie Decker,” she said grimly. “Your father is quite 
capable of thrashing you yet.” 

“Don’t I know it,” I said. “Every time we’re in the same room together, he reminds me.” 

“Charlie 

“I’m on my way,” I said quickly, heading it off. “Hang in there, Mom.” 

“Don’t get dirty! ” she called after me as I went out the door. “Don’t spill any ice cream 
on your pants! Remember to say thank you when you leave! Say hi to Mrs. Granger!” 

I didn’t say anything to any of these orders, feeling that to acknowledge might be to 
encourage. I just jammed the hand that wasn’t carrying the package deeper into my pocket 
and hunched my head. 

“Be a gentleman!” 

Gawd. 

“And remember not to start eating until Carol does!” 

Dear Gawd. 

I hurried to get out of her sight before she decided to run after me and check to see if I’d 
peed myself. 

But it wasn’t a day made to feel bad on. The sky was blue and the sun was just warm 
enough, and there was a little breeze to chase along at your heels. It was summer vacation, 
and Carol might even give me a tumble. Of course, I didn’t know just what I’d do if Carol 
did give me a tumble-maybe let her tide double on my Schwinn-but I could cross that 
bridge when I came to it. Perhaps I was even overestimating the negative sex appeal of the 
corduroy suit. If Carol had a crush on Myron Floren, she was going to love me. 

Then I saw Joe and started to feel stupid all over again. He was wearing ragged white 
Levi’s and a T-shirt. I could see him looking me up and down, and I winced. The jacket 
had little brass buttons with a heralds embossed on them. Rooty-toot. 

“Great suit,” he said. “You look just like that guy on the Lawrence Belch show. The one 
with the accordion.” 


“Myron Floren,” I said. “Riiight.” 



He offered me a stick of gum, and I skinned it. 

“My mother’s idea.” I stuck the gum into my mouth. Black Jack gum. There is no finer. I 
rolled it across my tongue and chomped. I was feeling better again. Joe was a friend, the 
only good one I ever had. He never seemed afraid of me, or revolted by my weird 
mannerisms (when a good idea strikes me, for instance, I have a tendency to walk around 
with my face screwed up in the most godawful grimaces without even being aware of it- 
didn’t Grace have a field day with that one). I had Joe beat in the brains department, and 
he had me in the making-friends department. Most kids don’t give a hoot in hell for 
brains; they go a penny a pound, and the kid with the high I.Q. who can’t play baseball or 
at least come in third in the local circle jerk is everybody’s fifth wheel. But Joe liked my 
brains. He never said, but I know he did. And because everyone liked Joe, they had to at 
least tolerate me. I won’t say I worshiped Joe McKennedy, but it was a close thing. He 
was my mojo. 

So there we were, walking along and chewing our Black Jack, when a hand came down 
on my shoulder like a firecracker. I almost choked on my gum. I stumbled, turned around, 
and there was Dicky Cable. 

Dicky was a squat kid who always somehow reminded me of a lawn mower, a big 
Briggs & Stratton self-propelling model with the choke stuck open. He had a big square 
grin, and it was chock-full of big white square teeth that fitted together on the top and 
bottom like the teeth in two meshing cogs. His teeth seemed to gnash and fume between 
his lips like revolving mower blades that are moving so fast they seem to stand still. He 
looked like he ate patrol boys for supper. For all I knew, he did. 

“Son of a gun, you look slick!” He winked elaborately at Joe. “Son of a gun, you just 
look slicker than owl shit!” Whack! on the back again. I felt very small. About three 
inches, I’d say. I was scared of him-I think I had a dim idea that I might have to fight him 
or crawfish before the day was over, and that I would probably crawfish. 

“Don’t break my back, okay?” I said. But he wouldn’t leave it alone. He just kept riding 
and riding until we got to Carol’s house. I knew the worst the minute we went through the 
door. Nobody was dressed up. Carol was there in the middle of the room, and she looked 
really beautiful. 

It hurt. She looked beautiful and casual, a shadow glass of sophistication over the just- 
beginning adolescent. She probably still cried and threw tantrums and locked herself in the 
bathroom, probably still listened to Beatles records and had a picture of David Cassidy, 
who was big that year, tucked into the corner of her vanity mirror, but none of that 
showed. And the fact that it didn’t show hurt me and made me feel dwarfed. She had a 
mst-colored scarf tied into her hair. She looked fifteen or sixteen, already filling out in 
front. She was wearing a brown dress. She was laughing with a bunch of kids and 
gesturing with her hands. 

Dicky and Joe went on over and gave her their presents, and she laughed and nodded 
and thank-you’d, and my God but she looked nice. 

I decided to leave. I didn’t want her to see me in my bow tie and my corduroy suit with 
the little brass buttons. I didn’t want to see her talking with Dicky Cable, who looked like 



a human Lawnboy to me but who seemed to look pretty good to her. I figured I could slip 
out before anyone got a really good look at me. Like Lamont Cranston, I would just cloud 
a few minds and then bug out. I had a buck in my pocket from weeding Mrs. Katzentz’s 
flower garden the day before, and I could go to the movies in Brunswick if I could hook a 
ride, and work up a good head of self-pity sitting there in the dark. 

But before I could even find the doorknob, Mrs. Granger spotted me. 

It wasn’t my day. Imagine a pleated skirt and one of those see-through chiffon blouses 
on a Sherman tank. A Sherman tank with two gun turrets. Her hair looked like a hurricane, 
one glump going one way and one glump the other. The two glumps were being held 
together somehow by a big sateen bow that was poison yellow in color. 

“Charlie Decker! ” she squealed, and spread out arms that looked like loaves of bread. 
Big loaves. I almost chickened and ran for it. She was an avalanche getting ready to 
happen. She was every Japanese horror monster ever made, all rolled into one, Ghidra, 
Mothra, Godzilla, Rodan, and Tukkan the Terrible trundling across the Granger living 
room. But that wasn’t the bad part. The bad part was everybody looking at me-you know 
what I’m talking about. 

She gave me a slobbery kiss on the cheek and crowed, “Well, don’t you look nice?” 

And for one horribly certain second I expected her to add: “Slicker than owl shit!” 

Well, I’m not going to torture either you or myself with a blow-by-blow. Where would 
be the sense? You’ve got the picture. Three hours of unadulterated hell. Dicky was right 
there with a “Well, don’t you look nice?” at every opportunity. A couple of other kids 
happened over to ask me who died. 

Joe was the only one who stuck by me, but even that embarrassed me a little. I could see 
him telling kids to lay off, and I didn’t like it very well. It made me feel like the village 
idiot. 

I think the only one who didn’t notice me at all was Carol. It would have bothered me if 
she had come over and asked me to dance when they put on the records, but it bothered 
me worse that she didn’t. I couldn’t dance, but it’s the thought that counts. 

So I stood around while the Beatles sang “The Ballad of John and Yoko” and “Let It 
Be,” while the Adreizi Brothers sang “We Gotta Get It On Again,” while Bobby Sherman 
sang “Hey, Mr. Sun” in his superbly tuneless style. I was giving my best imitation of a 
flowerpot. The party, meanwhile, went on. Did it ever. It seemed like it was going to go on 
eternally, the years flashing by outside like leaves in the wind, cars turning into clumps of 
rust, houses decaying, parents turning into dust, nations rising and falling. I had a feeling 
that we would still be there when Gabriel flew overhead, clutching the Judgment trump in 
one hand and a party favor in the other. There was ice cream, there was a big cake that 
said HAPPY BIRTHDAY, CAROL in green and red icing, there was more dancing, and a 
couple of kids wanted to play spin the bottle, but Mrs. Granger laughed a big jolly laugh 
and said no, haha, no no no. Oh, no. 

Finally Carol clapped her hands and said we were all going outside and play follow the 
leader, the game which asks the burning question: Are you ready for tomorrow’s society? 



Everybody spilled outside. I could hear them running around and having a good time, or 
whatever passes for a good time when you’re part of a mass puberty cramp. I lingered 
behind for a minute, half-thinking Carol would stop for a second, but she hurried right by. 

I went out and stood on the porch watching. Joe was there too, sitting with one leg hooked 
over the porch railing, and we both watched. Somehow Joe always seems to be where I 
end up, with one leg hooked over something, watching. 

“She’s stuck up,” he said finally. 

“Nah. She’s just busy. Lot of people. You know.’ 

“Shit,” Joe said. 

We were quiet for a minute. Someone yelled, “Hey, Joe!” 

“You’ll get crap all over that thing if you play, ” Joe said. “Your mother’ll have a kitten.” 

“She’ll have two,” I said. 

“Come on, Joe!” This time it was Carol. She had changed into denims, probably 
designed by Edith Head, and she looked flushed and pretty. Joe looked at me. He wanted 
to look out for me, and suddenly I felt more terrified than at any time since I woke up on 
that hunting trip up north. After a while, being somebody’s responsibility makes them hate 
you, and I was scared that Joe might hate me someday. I didn’t know all that then, not at 
twelve, but I sensed some of it. 

“Go on,” I said. 

“You sure you don’t want to-?” 

“Yeah. Yeah. I got to get home anyway.” 

I watched him go, hurt a little that he hadn’t offered to come with me, but relieved in a 
way. Then I started across the lawn toward the street. 

Dicky noticed me. “You on your way, pretty boy?” 

I should have said something clever like: Yeah. Give my regards to Broadway. Instead I 
told him to shut up. 

He jackrabbited in front of me as if he had been expecting it, that big lawnmower grin 
covering the entire lower half of his face. He smelled green and tough, like vines in the 
jungle. “What was that, pretty boy?” 

All of it lumped together, and I felt ugly. Really ugly. I could have spit at Hitler, that’s 
how ugly I felt. “I said shut up. Get out of my way.” 

[In the classroom, Carol Granger put her hands over her eyes ... but she didn’t tell me to 
stop. I respected her for that.] 

Everyone was staring, but no one was saying anything. Mrs. Granger was in the house, 
singing “Swanee” at the top of her voice. 

“Maybe you think you can shut me up.” He ran a hand through his oiled hair. 

I shoved him aside. It was like being outside myself. It was the first time I ever felt that 
way. Someone else, some other me, was in the driver’s seat. I was along for the ride, and 



that was all. 

He swung at me; his fist looped down and hit me on the shoulder. It just about paralyzed 
the big muscle in my arm. Jesus, did that hurt. It was like getting hit with an iceball. 

I grabbed him, because I never could box, and shoved him backward across the lawn, 
that big grin steaming and fuming at me. He dug his heels in and curled an arm around my 
neck, as if about to kiss me. His other fist started hammering at my back, but it was like 
someone knocking on a door long ago and far away. We tripped over a pink lawn flamingo 
and whumped to the ground. 

He was strong, but I was desperate. All of a sudden, beating up Dicky Cable was my 
mission in life. It was what I had been put on earth for. I remembered the Bible story about 
Jacob wrestling with the angel, and I giggled crazily into Dicky’s face. I was on top, and 
fighting to stay there. 

But all at once he slid away from me-he was awful slippery-and he smashed me across 
the neck with one arm. 

I let out a little cry and went over on my belly. He was astride my back in no time. I tried 
to turn, but I couldn’t. 

I couldn’t. He was going to beat me because I couldn’t. It was all senseless and horrible. 

I wondered where Carol was. Watching, probably. They were all watching. I felt my 
corduroy coat ripping out under the arms, the buttons with the heralds embossed on them 
ripping off one by one on the tough loam. But I couldn’t turn over. 

He was laughing. He grabbed my head and slammed it into the ground like a whiffle 
ball. “Hey, pretty boy!” Slam. Interior stars and the taste of grass in my mouth. Now I was 
the lawnmower. “Hey, pretty boy, don’t you look nice?” He picked my head up by the hair 
and slammed it down again. I started to cry. 

“Don’t you just look dan-dan-dandy!” Dicky Cable cried merrily, and hammered my 
head into the ground again- fore! “Don’t you just look woooonderfur „ 

Then he was off me, because Joe had dragged him off. “That’s enough, goddammit!” he 
was shouting. “Don’t you know that’s enough?” 

I got up, still crying. There was dirt in my hair. My head didn’t hurt enough for me to 
still be crying, but there it was. I couldn’t stop. They were all staring at me with that funny 
hangdog look kids get when they’ve gone too far, and I could see they didn’t want to look 
at me and see me crying. They looked at their feet to make sure they were still there. They 
glanced around at the chain-link fence to make sure no one was stealing it. A few of them 
glanced over at the swimming pool in the yard next door, just in case someone might be 
drowning and in need of a quick rescue. 

Carol was standing there, and she started to take a step forward. Then she looked around 
to see if anyone else was stepping forward, and no one else was. Dicky Cable was 
combing his hair. There was no dirt in it. Carol shuffled her feet. The wind made ripples 
on her blouse. 

Mrs. Granger had stopped singing “Swanee. ” She was on the porch, her mouth wide 



open. 

Joe came up and put a hand on my shoulder. “Hey, Charlie,” he said. “What do you say 
we go now, huh?” 

I tried to shove him away and only made myself fall down. “Leave me alone! ” I shouted 
at him. My voice was hoarse and raw. I was sobbing more than yelling. There was only 
one button left on the corduroy jacket, and it was hanging by a string. The pants were all 
juiced up with grass stains. I started to crawl around on the matted earth, still crying, 
picking up buttons. My face was hot. 

Dicky was humming some spry ditty and looking as if he might like to comb his hair 
again. Looking back, I have to admire him for it. At least he didn’t put on a crocodile face 
about the whole thing. 

Mrs. Granger came waddling toward me. “Charlie ... Charlie, dear-” 

“Shut up, fat old bag!” I screamed. I couldn’t see anything. It was all blurred in my 
eyes, and all the faces seemed to be crowding in on me. All the hands seemed to have 
claws. I couldn’t see to pick up any more buttons. “Fat old bag!” 

Then I ran away. 

I stopped behind an empty house down on Willow Street and just sat there until all the 
tears dried up. There was dried snot underneath my nose. I spat on my handkerchief and 
wiped it off. I blew my nose. An alley cat came by, and I tried to pet it. The cat shied from 
my hand. I knew exactly how he felt. 

The suit was pretty well shot, but I didn’t care about that. I didn’t even care about my 
mother, although she would probably call Dicky Cable’s mother and complain in her 
cultured voice. But my father. I could see him sitting, looking, carefully poker-faced, 
saying: How does the other guy look? 

And my lie. 

I sat down for the best part of an hour, planning to go down to the highway and stick out 
my thumb, hook a ride out of town, and never come back. 

But in the end I went home. 



Chapter 23 


Outside, a regular cop convention was shaping up. Blue trooper cars, white cruisers from 
the Lewiston P.D., a black-and-white from Brunswick, two more from Auburn. The police 
responsible for this automotive cornucopia ran hither and yon, ducked over low. More 
newsmen showed up. They poked cameras equipped with cobra-like telephoto lenses over 
the hoods of their vehicles. Sawhorses had been set up on the road above and below the 
school, along with double rows of those sooty little kerosene pots-to me those things 
always look like the bombs of some cartoon anarchist. The DPW people had put up a 
DETOUR sign. I guess they didn’t have anything more appropriate in stock-slow! 
MADMAN AT WORK, for instance. Don Grace and good old Tom were hobnobbing with 
a huge, blocky man in a state police uniform. Don seemed almost angry. The big blocky 
man was listening, but shaking his head. I took him to be Captain Frank Philbrick of the 
Maine State Police. I wondered if he knew I had a clear shot at him. 

Carol Granger spoke up in a trembling voice. The shame on her face was alarming. I 
hadn’t told that story to shame her. “I was just a kid, Charlie.” “I know that,” I said, and 
smiled. “You were awful pretty that day. You sure didn’t look like a kid.” 

“I had kind of a crush on Dicky Cable, too. “ 

“After the patty and all?” 

She looked even more ashamed. “Worse than ever. I went with him to the eighth-grade 
picnic. He seemed ... oh, daring, I guess. Wild. At the picnic he ... you know, he got 
fresh, and I let him, a little. But that was the only time I went anyplace with him. I don’t 
even know where he is now.” 

“Placerville Cemetery,” Dick Keene said flatly. 

It gave me a nasty start. It was as if I had just seen the ghost of Mrs. Underwood. I could 
still have pointed to the places where Dicky had pounded on me. The idea that he was 
dead made for a strange, almost dreamy terror in my mind-and I saw a reflection of what I 
was feeling on Carol’s face. He got fresh, and I let him, a little, she had said. What, 
exactly, did that mean to a bright college-bound girl like Carol? Maybe he had kissed her. 
Maybe he had even gotten her out into the puckerbrush and mapped the virgin territory of 
her burgeoning chest. At the eighth grade picnic, God save us all. He had been daring and 
wild. 

“What happened to him?” Don Lordi asked. 

Dick spoke slowly. “He got hit by a car. That was really funny. Not ha-ha, you know, but 
peculiar. He got his driver’s license just last October, and he used to drive like a fool. Like 
a crazy man. I guess he wanted everybody to know he had, you know, balls. It got so that 
no one would ride with him, hardly. He had this 1966 Pontiac, did all the body work 
himself. Painted her bottle green, with the ace of spades on the passenger side.” 

“Sure, I used to see that around,” Melvin said. “Over by the Harlow Rec.” 

“Put in a Hearst four-shifter all by himself,” Dick said. “Four-barrel carb, overhead cam, 



fuel injection. She purred. Ninety in second gear. I was with him one night when he went 
up the Stackpole Road in Harlow at ninety-five. We go around Brissett’s Bend and we 
start to slide. I hit the floor. You’re right, Charlie. He looked weird when he was smiling. I 
dunno if he looked exactly like a lawnmower, but he sure looked weird. He just kept 
grinning and grinning all the time we were sliding. And he goes ... like, to himself he 
goes, 'I can hold ‘er, I can hold ‘er,’ over and over again. And he did, I made him stop, and 
I walked home. My legs were all rubber. A couple of months later he got hit by a delivery 
truck up in Lewiston while he was crossing Lisbon Street. Randy Milliken was with him, 
and Randy said he wasn’t even drunk or stoned. It was the truck driver’s fault entirely. He 
went to jail for ninety days. But Dicky was dead. Funny.” 

Carol looked sick and white. I was afraid she might faint, and so, to take her mind 
somewhere else, I said, “Was your mother mad at me, Carol?” 

“Huh?” She looked around in that funny, startled way she had. 

“I called her a bag. A fat old bag, I think. “ 

“Oh.” She wrinkled her nose and then smiled, gratefully, I think, picking up on the 
gambit. “She was. She sure was. She thought that fight was all your fault. “ 

“Your mother and my mother used to both be in that club, didn’t they?” 

“Books and Bridge? Yeah.” Her legs were still uncrossed, and now her knees were apart 
a little. She laughed. “I’ll tell you the truth, Charlie. I never really cared for your mother, 
even though I only saw her a couple of times to say hi to. My mother was always talking 
about how dreadfully intelligent Mrs. Decker was, what a very fine grasp she had on the 
novels of Henry James, stuff like that. And what a fine little gentleman you were.” 

“Slicker than owl shit,” I agreed gravely. “You know, I used to get the same stuff about 
you. “ 

“You did?” 

“Sure.” An idea suddenly rose up and smacked me on the nose. How could I have 
possibly missed it so long, an old surmiser like me? I laughed with sudden sour delight. 
“And I bet I know why she was so deternuned I was going to wear my suit. It’s called 
‘Matchmaking,’ or ‘Wouldn’t They Make a Lovely Couple?’ or, ‘Think of the Intelligent 
Offspring.’ Played by all the best families, Carol. Will you marry me?” 

Carol looked at me with her mouth open. “They were ...” She couldn’t seem to finish it. 

“That’s what I think.” 

She smiled; a little giggle escaped her. Then she laughed right out loud. It seemed a little 
disrespectful of the dead, but I let it pass. Although, to tell you the truth, Mrs. Underwood 
was never far from my mind. After all, I was almost standing on her. 

“That big guy’s coming,” Billy Sawyer said. 

Sure enough, Frank Philbrick was striding toward the school, looking neither right nor 
left. I hoped the news photographers were getting his good side; who knew, he might want 
to use some of the pix on this year’s Xmas cards. He walked through the main door. Down 
the hall, as if in another world, I could hear his vague steps pause and then go up to the 



office. It occurred to me in a strange sort of way that he seemed real only inside. 
Everything beyond the windows was television. They were the show, not me. My 
classmates felt the same way. It was on their faces. 

Silence. 

Chink. The intercom. 

“Decker?” 

“Yes, sir?” I said. 

He was a heavy breather. You could hear him puffing and blowing into the mike up there 
like some large and sweaty animal. I don’t like that, never have. My father is like that on 
the telephone. A lot of heavy breathing in your ear, so you can almost smell the scotch and 
Pall Malls on his breath. It always seems unsanitary and somehow homosexual. 

“This is a very funny situation you’ve put us all in, Decker.” 

“I guess it is, sir.” 

“We don’t particularly like the idea of shooting you.” 

“No, sir, neither do 1.1 wouldn’t advise you to try.” 

Heavy breathing. “Okay, let’s get it out of the henhouse and see what we got in the sack. 
What’s your price?” 

“Price?” I said. “Price?” For one loony moment I had the impression he had taken me 
for an interesting piece of talking furniture-a Morns chair, maybe, equipped to huckster 
the prospective buyer with all sorts of pertinent info. At first the idea struck me funny. 
Then it made me mad. 

“For letting them go. What do you want? Air time? You got it. Some sort of statement to 
the papers? You got that.” Snort-snort-snore. Fikewise, puff-puff-puff. “But let’s do it and 
get it done before this thing turns into a hairball. But you got to tell us what you want. “ 

“You,” I said. 

The breath stopped. Then it started again, puffing and blowing. It was starting to really 
get on my nerves. “You’ll have to explain that,” he said. 

“Certainly, sir,” I said. “We can make a deal. Would you like to make a deal? Is that 
what you were saying?” 

No answer. Puff, snort. Philbrick was on the six-o’clock news every Memorial Day and 
Fabor Day, reading a please-drive-safely message off the teleprompter with a certain 
lumbering ineptitude that was fascinating and almost endearing. I had felt there was 
something familiar about him, something intimate that smacked ofdeja vu. Now I could 
place it. The breathing. Even on TV he sounded like a bull getting ready to mount Farmer 
Brown’s cow in the back forty. 

“What’s your deal?” 

“Tell me something first,” I said. “Is there anybody out there who thinks I might just 
decide to see how many people I can plug down here? Tike Don Grace, for instance?” 



“That piece of shit,” Sylvia said, then clapped a hand over her mouth. 

“Who said that?” Philbrick barked. 

Sylvia went white. 

“Me,” I said. “I have certain transsexual tendencies too, sir.” I didn’t figure he would 
know what that meant and would be too wary to ask. “Could you answer my question?” 

“Some people think you might go the rest of the way out of your gourd, yes,” he 
answered weightily. Somebody at the back of the room tittered. I don’t think the intercom 
picked it up. 

“Okay, then,” I said. “The deal is this. You be the hero. Come down here. Unarmed. 
Come inside with your hands on your head. I’ll let everybody go. Then I’ll blow your 
fucking head off. Sir. How’s that for a deal? You buy it?” 

Puff, snort, blow. “You got a dirty mouth, fella. There are girls down there. Young girls. 

Irma Bates looked around, startled, as if someone had just called her. 

“The deal,” I said. “The deal.” 

“No,” Philbrick said. “You’d shoot me and hold on to the hostages.” Puff, snort. “But 
I’ll come down. Maybe we can figure something out.” 

“Fella,” I said patiently, “if you sign off and I don’t see you going out the same door you 
came in within fifteen seconds, someone in here is just going to swirl down the spout. “ 

Nobody looked particularly worried at the thought of just swirling down the spout. 

Puff, puff. “Your chances of getting out of this alive are getting slimmer.” 

“Frank, my man, none of us get out of it alive. Even my old man knows that. “ 

“Will you come out?” 

“No. “ 

“If that’s how you feel.” He didn’t seem upset. “There’s a boy named Jones down there. 

I want to speak with him.” 

It seemed okay. “You’re on, Ted,” I told him. “Your big chance, boy. Don’t blow it. 
Folks, this kid is going to dance his balls off before your very eyes.” 

Ted was looking earnestly at the black grating of the intercom. “This is Ted Jones, sir. ” 
On him, “sir” sounded good. 

“Is everyone down there still all right, Jones?” 

“Yes, sir. “ 

“How do you judge Decker’s stability?” 

“I think he’s apt to do anything, sir,” he said, looking directly at me. There was a savage 
leer in his eyes. Carol looked suddenly angry. She opened her mouth as if to refute, and 
then, perhaps remembering her upcoming responsibilities as valedictorian and Leading 
Lamp of the Western World, she closed her mouth with a snap. 



“Thank you, Mr. Jones.” 

Ted looked absurdly pleased at being called mister. 

“Decker?” 

“Right here.” 

Snort, snort. “Be seeing you.” 

“I better see you,” I said. “Fifteen seconds.” Then, as an afterthought: “Philbrick?” 

“Yeah?” 

“You’ve got a shitty habit, you know it? I’ve noticed it on all those TV drive-safely 
pitches that you do. You breathe in people’s ears. You sound like a stallion in heat, 
Philbrick. That’s a shitty habit. You also sound like you’re reading off a teleprompter, even 
when you’re not. You ought to take care of stuff like that. You might save a life.” 

Philbrick puffed and snorted thoughtfully. 

“Screw, buddy,” he said, and the intercom clicked off. 

Exactly twelve seconds later he came out the front door, striding stolidly along. When he 
got to the cars that had been driven onto the lawn, there was another conference. Philbrick 
gestured a lot. 

Nobody said anything. Pat Fitzgerald was chewing a fingernail thoughtfully. Pig Pen had 
taken out another pencil and was studying it. And Sandra Cross was looking at me 
steadily. There seemed to be a kind of mist between us that made her glow. 

“What about sex?” Carol said suddenly, and when everyone looked at her, she colored. 

“Male,” Melvin said, and a couple of the jocks in the back of the room haw-hawed. 

“What do you mean?” I asked. 

Carol looked very much as if she wished her mouth had been stitched closed. “I thought 
when someone started to act... well ... you know, strangely ...” She stopped in 
confusion, but Susan Brooks sprang to the ramparts. 

“That’s right,” she said. “And you all ought to stop grinning. Everyone thinks sex is so 
dirty. That’s half what’s the matter with all of us. We worry about it. ” She looked 
protectively at Carol. 

“That’s what I meant,” Carol said. “Are you ... well, did you have some bad 
experience?” 

“Nothing since that time I went to bed with Mom,” I said blandly. 

An expression of utter shock struck her face, and then she saw I was joking. Pig Pen 
snickered dolefully and went on looking at his pencil. 

“No, really,” she said. 

“Well,” I said, frowning. “I’ll tell about my sex life if you’ll tell about yours.” 

“Oh ...” She looked shocked again, but in a pleasant way. 

Gracie Stanner laughed. “Cough up, Carol.” I had always gotten a murky impression 



that there was no love lost between those two girls, but now Grace seemed genuinely to be 
joking-as if some understood but never-mentioned inequality had been erased. 

” 'Ray, 'ray,” Corky Herald said, grinning. 

Carol was blushing furiously. “I’m sorry I asked.” 

“Go on,” Don Lordi said. “It won’t hurt.” 

“Everybody would tell,” Carol said. “I know the way bo ... the way people talk around. 

“Secrets,” Mike Gavin whispered hoarsely, “give me more secrets.” Everybody laughed, 
but it was getting to be no laughing matter. 

“You’re not being fair,” Susan Brooks said. 

“That’s right,” I said. “Let’s drop it.” 

“Oh ... never mind,” Carol said. “I’ll talk. I’ll tell you something.” 

It was my turn to be surprised. Everybody looked at her expectantly. I didn’t really know 
what they expected to hear-a bad case of penis envy, maybe, or Ten Nights with a Candle. 

I figured they were in for a disappointment, whatever it was. No whips, no chains, no 
night sweats. Small-town virgin, fresh, bright, pretty, and someday maybe she would blow 
Placerville and have a real life. Sometimes they change in college. Some of them discover 
existentialism and anomie and hash pipes. Sometimes they only join sororities and 
continue with the same sweet dream that began in junior high school, a dream so common 
to the pretty small-town virgins that it almost could have been cut from a Simplicity 
pattern, like a jumper or a Your Yummy Summer blouse or play skirt. There’s a whammy 
on bright girls and boys. If the bright ones have a twisted fiber, it shows. If they don’t, you 
can figure them as easily as square roots. Girls like Carol have a steady boyfriend and 
enjoy a little necking (but, as the Tubes say, “Don’t Touch Me There”), nothing overboard. 
It’s okay, I guess. You’d expect more, but, so sorry please, there just isn’t. Bright kids are 
like TV dinners. That’s all right. I don’t carry a big stick on that particular subject. Smart 
girls are just sort of dull. 

And Carol Granger had that image. She went steady with Buck Thorne (the perfect 
American name). Buck was the center of the Placerville High Greyhounds, which had 
posted an 11-0 record the previous fall, a fact that Coach Bob “Stone Balls” Stoneham 
made much of at our frequent school-spirit assemblies. 

Thorne was a good-natured shit who weighed in at a cool two-ten; not exactly the 
brightest thing on two feet (but college material, of course), and Carol probably had no 
trouble keeping him in line. I’ve noticed that pretty girls make the best lion tamers, too. 
Besides, I always had an idea that Buck Thorne thought the sexiest thing in the world was 
a quarterback sneak right up the middle. 

“I’m a virgin,” Carol said defiantly, startling me up out of my thoughts. She crossed her 
legs as if to prove it symbolically, then abruptly uncrossed them. “And I don’t think it’s so 
bad, either. Being a virgin is like being bright.” 

“It is?” Grace Stanner asked doubtfully. 



“You have to work at it,” Carol said. “That’s what I meant, you have to work at it.” The 
idea seemed to please her. It scared the hell out of me. 

“You mean Buck never ... “ 

“Oh, he used to want to. I suppose he still does. But I made things pretty clear to him 
early in the game. And I’m not frigid or anything, or a puritan. It’s just that 

. . ” She trailed off, searching. 

“You wouldn’t want to get pregnant,” I said. 

“No!” she said almost contemptuously. “I know all about that.” With something like 
shock I realized she was angry and upset because she was. Anger is a very difficult 
emotion for a programmed adolescent to handle. “I don’t live in books all the time. I read 
all about birth control in ... ” She bit her lip as the contradiction of what she was saying 
struck her. 

“Well,” I said. I tapped the stock of the pistol lightly on the desk blotter. “This is serious, 
Carol. Very serious. I think a girl should know why she’s a virgin, don’t you?” 

“I know why!” 

“Oh.” I nodded helpfully. Several girls were looking at her with interest. 

“Because ... “ 

Silence. Faintly, the sound of Jerry Kesserling using his whistle to direct traffic. 

“Because ... “ 

She looked around. Several of them flinched and looked down at their desks. Just then I 
would have given my house and lot, as the old farmers say, to know just how many virgins 
we had in here. “And you don’t all have to stare at me! I didn’t ask you to stare at me! I’m 
not going to talk about it! I don’t have to talk about it!” 

She looked at me bitterly. 

“People tear you down, that’s it. They grind you if you let them, just like Pig Pen said. 
They all want to pull you down to their level and make you dirty. Look at what they are 
doing to you, Charlie. “ 

I wasn’t sure they had done anything to me just yet, but I kept my mouth shut. 

“I was walking along Congress Street in Portland just before Christmas last year. I was 
with Donna Taylor. We were buying Christmas presents. I’d just bought my sister a scarf 
in Porteus-Mitchell, and we were talking about it and laughing. Just silly stuff. We were 
giggling. It was about four o’clock and just starting to get dark. It was snowing. All the 
colored lights were on, and the shop windows were full of glitter and packages ... pretty 
... and there was one of those Salvation Army Santa Clauses on the corner by Jones’s 
Book Shop. He was ringing his bell and smiling. I felt good. I felt really good. It was like 
the Christmas spirit, and all that. I was thinking about getting home and having hot 
chocolate with whipped cream on top of it. And then this old car drove by, and whoever 
was driving cranked his window down and yelled, 'Hi, cunt!’ “ 

Anne Lasky jumped. I have to admit that the word did sound awfully funny coming out 



of Carol Granger’s mouth. 

“Just like that,” she said bitterly. “It was all wrecked. Spoiled. Like an apple you thought 
was good and then bit into a worm hole. 'Hi, cunt.’ As if that was all there was, no person, 
just a huh-h-h ...” Her mouth pulled down in a trembling, agonized grimace. “And that’s 
like being bright, too. They want to stuff things into your head until it’s all filled up. It’s a 
different hole, that’s all. That’s all. “ 

Sandra Cross’s eyes~were half-closed, as if she dreamed. “You know,” she said. “I feel 
funny. I feel ... “ 

I wanted to jump up and tell her to keep her mouth shut, tell her not to incriminate 
herself in this fool’s parade, but I couldn’t. Repeat, couldn’t. If I didn’t play by my rules, 
who would? 

“I feel like this is all,” she said. 

“Either all brains or all cunt,” Carol said with brittle good humor. “Doesn’t leave room 
for much else, does it?” 

“Sometimes,” Sandra said, “I feel very empty.” 

“I ... ” Carol began, and then looked at Sandra, startled. “You do?” 

“Sure.” She looked thoughtfully out the broken windows. “I like to hang out clothes on 
windy days. Sometimes that’s all I feel like. A sheet on the line. You try to get interested in 
things ... Politics, the school ... I was on the Student Council last semester ... but it’s not 
real, and it’s awfully dull. And there aren’t a lot of minorities or anything around here to 
fight for, or ... well, you know. Important things. And so I let Ted do that to me.” 

I looked carefully at Ted, who was looking at Sandra with his face frozen. A great 
blackness began to drizzle down on me. I felt my throat close. 

“It wasn’t so hot,” Sandra said. “I don’t know what all the shouting’s about. It’s ...” She 
looked at me, her eyes widening, but I could hardly see her. But I could see Ted. He was 
very clear. In fact, he seemed to be lit by a strange golden glow that stood out in the new 
clotted darkness like a halo, a supernormal aura. 

I raised the pistol very carefully in both hands. 

For a moment I thought about the inner caves of my body, the living machines that run 
on and on in the endless dark. 

I was going to shoot him, but they shot me first. 



Chapter 24 


I know what happened now, although I didn’t then. 

They had the best sharpshooter in the state out there, a state policeman named Daniel 
Malvern, from Kent’s Hill. There was a picture of him in the Lewiston Sun after 
everything was all over. He was a small man with a crew cut. He looked like an 
accountant. They had given him a huge Mauser with a telescopic sight. Daniel Malvern 
took the Mauser to a gravel pit several miles away, test-fired it, and then brought it back 
and walked down to one of the cruisers parked on the lawn with the rifle stuffed down his 
pants leg. He rested in the prone position behind the front fender, in deep shadow. He 
gauged the windage with a wet thumb. Nil. He peered through the telescopic sight. 
Through the 30X cross-hatched lens, I must have looked as big as a bulldozer. There was 
not even any window glass to throw a glare, because I had broken it earlier when I fired 
the pistol to make them stop using the bullhorn. An easy shot. But Dan Malvern took his 
time. After all, it was probably the most important shot of his life. I was not a clay pigeon; 
my guts were going to splatter all over the blackboard behind me when the bullet made its 
mushrooming exit. Crime Does Not Pay. Loony Bites the Dust. And when I half-rose, 
half-leaned over Mrs. Underwood’s desk to put a bullet in Ted Jones, Dan’s big chance 
came. My body half-twisted toward him. He fired his weapon and put the bullet exactly 
where he had hoped and expected to put it: through my breast pocket, which lay directly 
over the living machine of my heart. 

Where it stmck the hard steel of Titus, the Helpful Padlock. 



Chapter 25 


I held on to the pistol. 

The impact of the slug knocked me straight backward against the blackboard, where the 
chalk ledge bit cruelly into my back. Both of my cordovan loafers flew off. I hit the floor 
on my fanny. I didn’t know what had happened. There was too much all at once. A huge 
auger of pain drilled my chest, followed by sudden numbness. The ability to breathe 
stopped. Spots flashed in front of my eyes. 

Irma Bates was screaming. Her eyes were closed, her fists were clenched, and her face 
was a hectic, patched red with effort. It was far away and dreamy, coming from a 
mountain or a tunnel. 

Ted Jones was getting out of his seat again, floating really, in a slow and dreamy motion. 
This time he was going for the door. “They got the son of a bitch!” His voice sounded 
incredibly slow and draggy, like a 78-RPM record turned down to 33 1/3. “They got the 
crazy-' 

“Sit down.” 

He didn’t hear me. I wasn’t surprised. I could hardly hear myself. I didn’t have any wind 
to talk with. He was reaching for the doorknob when I fired the pistol. The bullet slammed 
into the wood beside his head, and he shied away. When he turned around, his face was a 
stew of changing emotions: white astonishment, agonized unbelief, and twisted, 
murdering hate. 

“You can’t... you’re ... “ 

“Sit down.” A little better. Perhaps six seconds had gone by since I had been knocked on 
my ass. “Stop yelling, Irma. “ 

“You’re shot, Charlie,” Grace Stanner said calmly. 

I looked outside. The cops were rushing the building. I fired twice and made myself 
breathe. The auger struck again, threatening to explode my chest with pain. 

“Get back! I’ll shoot them!” 

Frank Philbrick stopped and looked around wildly. He seemed to want a telephone call 
from Jesus. He looked confused enough to try and carry on with it, so I fired again, up in 
the air. It was his turn to go a hundred miles in his head during half a second. “Get back!” 
he yelled. “Get the Christ back!” 

They retreated, getting back even quicker than they had gotten down. 

Ted Jones was edging toward me. That boy was simply not part of the real universe. “Do 
you want me to shoot your weenie off?” I asked. 

He stopped, but that terrifying, twisted expression was still on his face. “You’re dead,” 
he hissed. “Lie down, God damn you.” 


“Sit down, Ted.” 



The pain in my chest was a live thing, horrible. The left side of my rib cage felt as if it 
had been struck by Maxwell’s silver hammer. They were staring at me, my captive class, 
with expressions of preoccupied horror. I didn’t dare look down at myself because of what 
I might see. The clock said 10:55. 

“DECKER!” 

“Sit down, Ted.” 

He lifted his lip in an unconscious facial gesture that made him look like a slatsided 
hound that I had seen lying mortally wounded beside a busy street when I was just a kid. 
He thought about it, and then he sat down. He had a good set of sweat circles started under 
his armpits. 

“DECKER! MR. DENVER IS GOING UP TO THE OFFICE!” 

It was Philbrick on the bullhorn, and not even the asexual sexuality of the amplification 
could hide how badly he was shaken up. An hour before, it would have pleased me- 
fulfilled me-in a savage way, but now I felt nothing. 

“HE WANTS TO TALK TO YOU!” 

Tom walked out from behind one of the police cars and started across the lawn, walking 
slowly, as if he expected to be shot at any second. Even at a distance, he looked ten years 
older. Not even that could please me. Not even that. 

I got up a little at a time, fighting the pain, and stepped into my loafers. I almost fell, and 
had to clutch the desk with my free hand for support. 

“Oh, Charlie,” Sylvia moaned. 

I fully loaded the pistol again, this time keeping it pointed toward them (I don’t think 
even Ted knew it couldn’t be fired with the clip sprung), doing it slowly so I could put off 
looking down at myself for as long as possible. My chest throbbed and ached. Sandra 
Cross seemed lost again in whatever fuzzy dream it was that she contemplated. 

The clip snapped back into place, and I looked down at myself almost casually. I was 
wearing a neat blue shirt (I’ve always been fond of solid colors), and I expected to see it 
matted with my blood. But it wasn’t. 

There was a large dark hole, dead center through my breast pocket, which was on the 
left. An uneven scattering of smaller holes radiated out from all around it, like one of 
those solar-system maps that show the planets going around the sun. I reached inside the 
pocket very carefully. That was when I remembered Titus, whom I had rescued from the 
wastebasket. I pulled him out very carefully. The class went “Aaahhh! ” as if I had just 
sawed a lady in half or pulled a hundred-dollar bill out of Pig Pen’s nose. None of them 
asked why I was carrying my combination lock in my pocket. I was glad. Ted was looking 
at Titus bitterly, and suddenly I was very angry at Ted. And I wondered how he would like 
to eat poor old Titus for his lunch. 

The bullet had smashed through the hard, high-density plastic dial, sending highspeed 
bits of shrapnel out through my shirt. Not one of them had touched my flesh. The steel 
behind the face had caught the slug, had turned it into a deadly lead blossom with three 



bright petals. The whole lock was twisted, as if by fire. The semi-circular lock bar had 
been pulled like taffy. The back side of the lock had bulged but not broken through. 

[It was a year and a half later when I saw that commercial on TV for the first 
time. The one where the guy with the rifle takes aim at the padlock nailed to 
the board. You even get a look through the telescopic sight at the padlock-a 
Yale, a Master, I don’t know which. The guy pulls the trigger. And you see 
that lock jump and dent and mash, and it looked in that commercial just the 
way old Titus looked when I took him out of my pocket. They show it 
happening in regular motion, and then they show it in slow motion, and the 
first and only time I saw it, I leaned down between my legs and puked 
between my ankles. They took me away. They took me back to my room. And 
the next day my pet shrink here looked at a note and said, “They tell me you 
had a setback yesterday, Charlie. Want to talk about it?” But I couldn’t talk 
about it. I’ve never been able to talk about it. Until now.] 

Chink! on the intercom. 

“Charlie?” 

“Just a minute, Tom. Don’t rush me.” 

“Charlie, you have to-” 

“Shut the fuck up.’” 

I unbuttoned my shirt and opened it. The class went “Aaahhh!” again. Titus was 
imprinted on my chest in angry purple, and the flesh had been mashed into an indentation 
that looked deep enough to hold water. I didn’t like to look at it, any more than I liked to 
look at the old drunk with the bag of flesh below his nose, the one that always hung 
around Gogan’s downtown. It made me feel nauseated. I closed my shirt. 

“Tom, those bastards tried to shoot me.” 

“They didn’t mean-” 

“Don’t tell me what they didn’t mean to do!” I screamed at him. There was a crazy note 
in my voice that made me feel even sicker. “You get your old cracked ass out there and tell 
that mother-fucker Philbrick he almost had a bloodbath down here, have you got it?” 

“Charlie ... ” He was whining. 

“Shut up, Tom. I’m through fooling with you. I’m in the driver’s seat. Not you, not 
Philbrick, not the superintendent of schools, not God. Have you got it?” 

“Charlie, let me explain.” 

“HAVE YOU GOT IT?” 

“Yes, but-” 

“All right. We’ve got that straight. So you go back and give him a message, Tom. Tell 
him that I don’t want to see him or anyone else out there make a move during the next 
hour. No one is going to come in and talk on this goddamn intercom, and no one else is 
going to try and shoot me. At noon I want to talk to Philbrick again. Can you remember all 



that, Tom?” 

“Yes, Charlie. All right, Charlie.” He sounded relieved and foolish. “They just wanted 
me to tell you it was a mistake, Charlie. Somebody’s gun went off by accident and— 

“One other thing, Tom. Very important.” 

“What, Charlie?” 

“You need to know where you stand with that guy Philbrick, Tom. He gave you a shovel 
and told you to walk behind the ox cart, and you’re doing it. I gave him a chance to put his 
ass on the line, and he wouldn’t do it. Wake up, Tom. Assert yourself.” 

“Charlie, you have to understand what a terrible position you’re putting us all in.” 

“Get out, Tom.” 

He clicked off. We all watched him come out through the main doors and start back 
toward the cars. Philbrick came over to him and put a hand on his arm. Tom shook it off. 

A lot of the kids smiled at that. I was past smiling. I wanted to be home in my bed and 
dreaming all of this. 

“Sandra,” I said. “I believe you were telling us about your affaire de coeur with Ted.” 

Ted threw a dark glance at me. “You don’t want to say anything, Sandy. He’s just trying 
to make all of us look dirty like he is. He’s sick and full of germs. Don’t let him infect you 
with what he’s got.” 

She smiled. She was really radiant when she smiled like a child. I felt a bitter nostalgia, 
not for her, exactly, or for any imagined purity (Dale Evans panties and all that), but for 
something I could not precisely put my hand on. Her, maybe. Whatever it was, it made me 
feel ashamed. 

“But I want to,” she said. “I want to get it on, too. I always have.” 

It was eleven o’clock on the nose. The activity outside seemed to have died. I was sitting 
well back from the windows now. I thought Philbrick would give me my hour. He 
wouldn’t dare do anything else now. I felt better, the pain in my chest receding a little. But 
my head felt very strange, as if my brains were running without coolant and overheating 
like a big hot rod engine in the desert. At times I was almost tempted to feel (foolish 
conceit) that I was holding them myself, by sheer willpower. Now I know, of course, that 
nothing could have been further from the truth. I had one real hostage that day, and his 
name was Ted Jones. 

“We just did it,” Sandra said, looking down at her desk and tracing the engravings there 
with a shaped thumbnail. I could see the part in her hair. She parted it on the side, like a 
boy. “Ted asked me to go to the Wonderland dance with him, and I said I would. I had a 
new formal.” She looked at me reproachfully. “You never asked me, Charlie. “ 

Could it be that I was shot in the padlock only ten minutes ago? I had an insane urge to 
ask them if it had really happened. How strange they all were! 

“So we went to that, and afterward we went to the Hawaiian Hut. Ted knows the man 
who runs it and got us cocktails. Just like the grown-ups.” It was hard to tell if there was 



sarcasm in her voice or not. 


Ted’s face was carefully blank, but the others were looking at him as if they were seeing 
a strange bug. Here was a kid, one of their own, who knew the man who runs it. Corky 
Herald was obviously chewing it and not liking it. 

“I didn’t think I’d like the drinks, because everybody says liquor tastes horrible at first, 
but I did. I had a gin fizz, and it tickled my nose.” She looked pensively in front of her. 
“There were little straws in it, red ones, and I didn’t know if you drank through them or 
just stirred your drink with them, until Ted told me. It was a very nice time. Ted talked 
about how nice it was playing golf at Poland Springs. He said he’d take me sometime and 
teach me the game, if I wanted.” 

Ted was curling and uncurling his lip again, doglike. 

“He wasn’t, you know, fresh or anything. He kissed me good night, though, and he 
wasn’t a bit nervous about it. Some boys are just miserable all the way home, wondering if 
they should try to kiss you good night or not. I always kissed them, just so they wouldn’t 
feel bad. If they were yucky, I just pretended I was licking a letter.” 

I remembered the first time I took Sandy Cross out, to the regular Saturday-night dance 
at the high school. I had been miserable all the way home, wondering if I should kiss her 
good night or not. I finally didn’t. 

“After that, we went out three more times. Ted was very nice. He could always think of 
funny things to say, but he never told dirty jokes or anything, you know, like that. We did 
some necking, and that was all. Then I didn’t see him to go out with for a long time, not 
until this April. He asked me if I wanted to go to the Rollerdrome in Lewiston.” 

I had wanted to ask her to go to the Wonderland dance with me, but I hadn’t dared. Joe, 
who always got dates when he wanted them, kept saying why don’t you, and I kept getting 
more nervous and kept telling him to fuck off. Finally I got up the stuff to call her house, 
but I had to hang up the telephone after one ring and run to the bathroom and throw up. As 
I told you, my stomach is bad. 

“We were having a pretty blah time, when all of a sudden these kids got into an 
argument on the middle of the floor, ” Sandra said. “Harlow boys and Lewiston boys, I 
think. Anyway, a big fight started. Some of them were fighting on their roller skates, but 
most of them had taken them off. The man who runs it came out and said if they didn’t 
stop, he was going to close. People were getting bloody noses and skating around and 
kicking people that had fallen down, and punching and yelling horrible things. And all the 
time, the jukebox was turned up real loud, playing Rolling Stones music.” 

She paused, and then went on: “Ted and I were standing in one corner of the floor, by 
the bandstand. They have live music on Saturday nights, you know. This one boy skated 
by, wearing a black jacket. He had long hair and pimples. He laughed and waved at Ted 
when he went by and yelled, Tuck her, buddy, I did!’ And Ted just reached out and 
popped him upside the head. The kid went skating right into the middle part of the rink 
and tripped over some kid’s shoes and fell on his head. Anyway, Ted was looking at me, 
and his eyes were, you know, almost bugging out of his head. He was grinning. You know, 



that’s really the only time I ever really saw Ted grin, like he was having a good time. 

“Ted goes to me, Til be right back,’ and he walks across the rink to that inside part 
where the kid who said that was still getting up. Ted grabbed him by the back of the jacket 
and ... I don’t know ... started to yank him back and forth ... and the kid couldn’t turn 
around ... and Ted just kept yanking him back and forth, and that kid’s head was 
bouncing, and then his jacket ripped right down the middle. And he goes, ‘I’ll kill you for 
ripping my best jacket, you m. f.’ So Ted hit him again, and the kid fell down, and Ted 
threw the piece of his jacket he was holding right down on top of him. Then he came back 
to where I was standing, and we left. We drove out into Auburn to a gravel pit he knew 
about. It was on that road to Lost Valley, I think. Then we did it. In the back seat.” 

She was tracing the graffiti on her desk again. “It didn’t hurt very much. I thought it 
would, but it didn’t. It was nice. ” She sounded as if she were discussing a Walt Disney 
feature film, one of those with all the cute little animals. Only, this one was starring Ted 
Jones as the Bald-Headed Woodchuck. 

“He didn’t use one of those things like he said he would, but I didn’t get pregnant or 
anything. “ 

Slow red was beginning to creep out of the collar of Ted’s khaki army shirt, spreading 
up his neck and over his cheeks. His face remained fumingly expressionless. 

Sandra’s hands made slow, languorous gestures. I suddenly knew that her natural habitat 
would be in a porch hammock at the very August height of summer, temperature ninety- 
two in the shade, reading a book (or perhaps just staring out at the heat shimmer rising 
over the road), a can of Seven-Up beside her with an elbow straw in it, dressed in cool 
white short-shorts and a brief halter with the straps pushed down, small diamonds of sweat 
stippled across the upper swell of her breasts and her lower stomach .... 

“He apologized afterward. He acted uncomfortable, and I felt a little bad for him. He 
kept saying he would marry me if ... you know, if I got preggers. He was really upset. 

And I go, ‘Well, let’s not buy trouble, Teddy,’ and he goes, ‘Don’t call me that, it’s a baby 
name.’ I think he was surprised I did it with him. And I didn’t get preggers. There just 
didn’t seem to be that much to it. 

“Sometimes I feel like a doll. Not really real. You know it? I fix my hair, and every now 
and then I have to hem a skirt, or maybe I have to baby-sit the kids when Mom and Dad 
go out. And it all just seems very fake. Like I could peek behind the living-room wall and 
it would be cardboard, with a director and a cameraman getting ready for the next scene. 
Like the grass and the sky were painted on canvas flats. Fake. ” She looked at me 
earnestly. “Did you ever feel like that, Charlie?” 

I thought about it very carefully. “No,” I said. “I can’t remember that ever crossing my 
mind, Sandy.” 

“It crossed mine. Even more after with Ted. But I didn’t get pregnant or anything. I used 
to think every girl got pregnant the first time, without fail. I tried to imagine what it would 
be like, telling my parents. My father would get real mad and want to know who the son 
of a bee was, and my mother would cry and say, ‘I thought we raised you right.’ That 



would have been real. But after a while I stopped thinking about that. I couldn’t even 
remember exactly what it felt like, having him ... well, inside me. So I went back to the 
Rollerdrome.” 

The room was totally silent. Never in her wildest dreams could Mrs. Underwood have 
hoped to command such attention as Sandra Cross commanded now. 

“This boy picked me up. I let him pick me up. ” Her eyes had picked up a strange 
sparkle. “I wore my shortest skirt. My powder-blue one. And a thin blouse. Later on, we 
went out back. And that seemed real. He wasn’t polite at all. He was sort of ... jerky. I 
didn’t know him at all. I kept thinking that maybe he was one of those sex maniacs. That 
he might have a knife. That he might make me take dope. Or that I might get pregnant. I 
felt alive. “ 

Ted Jones had finally turned and was looking at Sandra with an almost woodcut 
expression of horror and dead revulsion. It all seemed like a dream-something out of le 
moyen age, a dark passion play. 

“That was Saturday night, and the band was playing. You could hear it out in the parking 
lot, but kind of faint. The Rollerdrome doesn’t look like much from the back, just all 
boxes and crates piled up, and trashcans full of Coke bottles. I was scared, but I was 
excited, too. He was breathing really fast and holding on to my wrist tight, as if he 
expected me to try to get away. He ... “ 

Ted made a horrid gagging sound. It was hand to believe that anyone in my peer group 
could be touched so painfully by anything other than the death of a parent. Again I 
admired him. 

“He had an old black car, and it made me think of how my mother used to tell me when I 
was just little that sometimes strange men want you to get in the car with them and you 
should never do it. That excited me too. I can remember thinking: What if he kidnaps me 
and takes me to some old shack in the country and holds me for ransom? He opened the 
back door, and I got in. He started to kiss me. His mouth was all greasy, like he’d been 
eating pizza. They sell pizza inside for twenty cents a slice. He started to feel me up, and I 
could see he was smudging pizza on my blouse. Then we were lying down, and I pulled 
my skirt up for him-” 

“Shut up! ” Ted cried out with savage suddenness. He brought both fists crashing down 
on his desk, and everybody jumped. “You rotten whore! You can’t tell that in front of 
people! Shut your mouth or I’ll shut it for you! You-” 

“You shut up, Teddy, or I’ll knock your teeth down your fucking throat, ” Dick Keene 
said coldly. “You got yours, didn’t you?” 

Ted gaped at him. The two of them shot a lot of pool together down at the Harlow Rec, 
and sometimes went cruising in Ted’s car. I wondered if they would be hanging out 
together when this was all over. I had my doubts. 

“He didn’t smell very nice,” Sandra continued, as if there had been no interruption at all. 
“But he was hard. And bigger than Ted. Not circumcised, either. I remember that. It 
looked like a plum when he pushed it out of, you know, his foreskin. I thought it might 



hurt even, though I wasn’t a virgin anymore. I thought the police might come and arrest 
us. I knew they walked through the parking lot to make sure no one was stealing hubcaps 
or anything. 

“And a funny thing started to happen inside me, before he even got my pants down. I 
never felt anything so good. Or so real. ” She swallowed. Her face was flushed. “He 
touched me with his hand, and I went. Just like that. And the funny thing was, he didn’t 
even get to do it. He was trying to get it in and I was trying to help him and it kept rubbing 
against my leg and all of a sudden ... you know. And he just laid there on top of me for a 
minute, and then he said in my ear: ‘You little bitch. You did that on purpose,’ And that 
was all.” 

She shook her head vaguely. “But it was very real. I can remember everything-the 
music, the way he smiled, the sound his zipper made when he opened it-everything. “ 

She smiled at me, that strange, dreamy smile. 

“But this has been better, Charlie.” 

And the strange thing was, I couldn’t tell if I felt sick or not. I didn’t think I did, but it 
was really too close to call. I guess when you turn off the main road, you have to be 
prepared to see some funny houses. “How do people know they’re real?” I muttered. 

“What, Charlie?” 

“Nothing. “ 

I looked at them very carefully. They didn’t look sick, any of them. There was a healthy 
sheen on every eye. There was something in me (maybe it came over on the Mayflower) 
that wanted to know: How could she let that beyond the walls of herself? How could she 
say that? But there was nothing in the faces that I saw to echo that thought. There would 
have been in Philbrick’s face. In good old Tom’s face. Probably not in Don Grace’s, but he 
would have been thinking it. Secretly, all the evening news shows notwithstanding, I’d 
held the belief that things change but people don’t. It was something of a horror to begin 
realizing that all those years I’d been playing baseball on a soccer field. Pig Pen was still 
studying the bitter lines of his pencil. Susan Brooks only looked sweetly sympathetic. 

Dick Keene had a half-interested, half-lustful expression on his face. Corky’s head was 
furrowed and frowning as he wrestled with it. Gracie looked slightly surprised, but that 
was all. Irma Bates merely looked vapid. I don’t think she had recovered from seeing me 
shot. Were the lives of all our elders so plain that Sandy’s story would have made lurid 
reading for them? Or were all of theirs so strange and full of terrifying mental foliage that 
their classmate’s sexual adventure was on a level with winning a pinball replay? I didn’t 
want to think about it. I was in no position to be reviewing moral implications. 

Only Ted looked sick and horrified, and he no longer counted. 

“I don’t know what’s going to happen,” Carol Granger said, mildly worried. She looked 
around. “I’m afraid all of this changes things. I don’t like it.” She looked at me accusingly. 
“I liked the way things were going, Charlie. I don’t want things to change after this is over. 


“Heh,” I said. 



But that kind of comment had no power over the situation. Things had gotten out of 
control. There was no real way that could be denied anymore. I had a sudden urge to laugh 
at all of them, to point out that I had started out as the main attraction and had ended up as 
the sideshow. 

“I have to go to the bathroom,” Irma Bates said suddenly. 

“Hold it,” I said. Sylvia laughed. 

“Turnabout is fair play,” I said. “I promised to tell you about my sex life. In all actuality, 
there isn’t very much to tell about, unless you read palms. However, there is one little 
story which you might find interesting.” 

Sarah Pasterne yawned, and I felt a sudden, excruciating urge to blow her head off. But 
number two must try harder, as they say in the rent-a-car ads. Some cats drive faster, but 
Decker vacuums all the psychic cigarette butts from the ashtrays of your mind. 

I was suddenly reminded of that Beatles song that starts off: “I read the news today, oh 
boy ... “ 

I told them: 



Chapter 26 


In the summer before my junior year at Placerville, Joe and I drove up to Bangor to 
spend a weekend with Joe’s brother, who had a summer job working for the Bangor 
Sanitation Department. Pete McKennedy was twenty-one (a fantastic age, it seemed to 
me; I was struggling through the open sewer that is seventeen) and going to the University 
of Maine, where he was majoring in English. 

It looked like it was going to be a great weekend. On Friday night I got drunk for the 
first time in my life, along with Pete and Joe and one or two of Pete’s friends, and I wasn’t 
even very hungover the next day. Pete didn’t work Saturdays, so he took us up to the 
campus and showed us around. It’s really very pretty up there in summer, although on a 
Saturday in July there weren’t many pretty coeds to look at. Pete told us that most of the 
summer students took off for Bar Harbor or Clear Lake on weekends. 

We were just getting ready to go back to Pete’s place when he saw a guy he knew 
slouching down toward the steam-plant parking lot. 

“Scragg!” He yelled. “Hey, Scragg!” 

Scragg was a big guy wearing paint-splattered, faded jeans and a blue workshirt. He had 
a drooping sand-colored mustache and was smoking an evil-looking little black cigar that 
he later identified as the Original Smoky Perote. It smelled like slowly burning underwear. 

“How’s it hanging?” He asked. 

“Up a foot,” Pete said. “This is my brother, Joe, and his buddy Charlie Decker,” he 
introduced. “Scragg Simpson. “ 

“Howdy-doody,” Scragg said, shaking hands and dismissing us. “What you doing 
tonight, Peter?” 

“Thought the three of us might go to a movie. “ 

“Doan do that, Pete,” Scragg said with a grin. “Doan do that, baby.” 

“What’s better?” Pete asked, also grinning. 

“Dana Collette’s throwing a party at this camp her folks own out near Schoodic Point. 
There’s gonna be about forty million unattached ladies there. Bring dope. “ 

“Does Larry Moeller have any grass?” Pete asked. 

“Last I knew, he had a shitload. Foreign, domestic, local... everything but filter tips. “ 

Pete nodded. “We’ll be there, unless the creek rises.” 

Scragg nodded and waved a hand as he prepared to resume his version of that ever- 
popular form of campus locomotion, the Undergraduate Slouch. “Meetcha,” he said to Joe 
and me. 

We went down to see Jerry Mueller, who Pete said was the biggest dope dealer in the 
Orono-Oldtown-Stillwater triangle. I kept my cool about it, as if I were one of the original 
Placerville Jones men, but privately I was excited and pretty apprehensive. As I remember 



it, I sort of expected to see Jerry sitting naked on the john with a piece of rubber flex tied 
off below his elbow and a hypo dangling from the big forearm vein. And watching the rise 
and fall of ancient Atlantis in his navel. 

He had a small apartment in Oldtown, which borders the campus on one side. Oldtown 
is a small city with three distinctions: its paper mill; its canoe factory; and twelve of the 
roughest honky-tonks in this great smiling country. It also has an encampment of real 
reservation Indians, and most of them look at you as if wondering how much hair you 
might have growing out of your asshole and whether or not it would be worth scalping. 

Jerry turned out to be not an ominous Jones-man type holding court amid the reek of 
incense and Ravi Shankar music, but a small guy with a constant wedge-of-lemon grin. He 
was fully clothed and in his right mind. His only ornament was a bright yellow button 
which bore the message GOLDILOCKS LOVED IT. Instead of Ravi and His Incredible 
Boinging Sitar, he had a large collection of bluegrass music. When I saw his Greenbriar 
Boys albums, I asked him if he’d ever heard the Tarr Brothers-I’ve always been a country- 
and-bluegrass nut. After that, we were off. Pete and Joe just sat around looking bored until 
Jerry produced what looked like a small cigarette wrapped in brown paper. 

“You want to light it?” he asked Pete. 

Pete lit it. The smell was pungent, almost tart, and very pleasant. He drew it deep, held 
the smoke, and passed the j on to Joe, who coughed most of it out. 

Jerry turned back to me. “You ever heard the Clinch Mountain Boys?” 

I shook my head. “Heard of them, though.” 

“You gotta listen to this,” he said. “Boy, is it horny.” He put an LP with a weird label on 
the stereo. The j came around to me. “You smoke cigarettes?” Jerry asked me paternally. 

I shook my head. 

“Then draw slow, or you’ll lose it.” 

I drew slow. The smoke was sweet, rather heavy, acrid, dry. I held my breath and passed 
the j on to Jerry. The Clinch Mountain Boys started in on “Blue Ridge Breakdown. “ 

Half an hour later we had progressed through two more joints and were listening to Flatt 
and Scruggs charge through a little number called “Russian Around. ” I was about ready to 
ask when I should start feeling stoned when I realized I could actually visualize the banjo 
chords in my mind. They were bright, like long.steel threads, and shuttling back and forth 
like looms. They were moving rapidly, but I could follow them if I concentrated deeply. I 
tried to tell Joe about it, but he only looked at me in a puzzled, fuzzy way. We both 
laughed. Pete was looking at a picture of Niagara Falls on the wall very closely. 

We ended up sticking around until almost five o’clock, and when we left, I was wrecked 
out of my mind. Pete bought an ounce of grass from Jerry, and we took off for Schoodic. 
Jerry stood in the doorway of his apartment and waved good-bye and yelled for me to 
come back and bring some of my records. 

That’s the last really happy time I can remember. 

It was a long drive down to the coast. All three of us were still very high, and although 



Pete had no trouble driving, none of us could seem to talk without getting the giggles. I 
remember asking Pete once what this Dana Collette who was throwing the party looked 
like, and he just leered. That made me laugh until I thought my stomach was going to 
explode. I could still hear bluegrass playing in my head. 

Pete had been to a party out there in the spring, and we only took one wrong turn finding 
it. It was at the end of a narrow mile of gravel marked PRIVATE ROAD. You could hear 
the heavy bass signature of the music a quarter-mile from the cabin. There were so many 
cars stacked up that we had to walk from just about that point. 

Pete parked and we got out. I was starting to feel unsure of myself and self-conscious 
again (partly the residue of the pot and partly just me), worried about how young and 
stupid I would probably look to all these college people. Jerry Mueller had to be one in a 
hundred. I decided I would just stick close to Joe and keep my mouth closed. 

As it turned out, I could have saved the worry. The place was packed to the rafters with 
what seemed like a million people, every one of them drunk, stoned, or both. The smell of 
marijuana hung on the air like a heavy mist, along with wine and hot hods. The place was 
a babble of conversation, loud rock music, and laughter. There were two lights dangling 
from the ceiling, one red, one blue. That rounds off the first impression the place gave me- 
it was like the funhouse at Old Orchard Beach. 

Scragg waved at us from across the room. 

“Pete!” someone squealed, almost in my ear. I jerked and almost swallowed my tongue. 

It was a short, almost pretty girl with bleached hair and the shortest dress I have ever 
seen-it was a bright fluorescent orange that looked almost alive in the weird lighting. 

“Hi, Dana! ” Pete shouted over the noise. “This is my brother, Joe, and one of his 
buddies, Charlie Decker. “ 

She said hi to both of us. “Isn’t it a great party?” she asked me. When she moved, the 
hem of her dress swirled around the lace bottoms of her panties. 

I said it was a great party. 

“Did you bring any goodies, Pete?” Pete grinned and held up his Baggie of weed. Her 
eyes sparkled. She was standing next to me, her hip pressed casually against mine. I could 
feel her bare thigh. I began to get as horny as a bull moose. 

“Bring it over here,” she said. 

We found a relatively unoccupied corner behind one of the stereo speakers, and Dana 
produced a huge scrolled water pipe from a low bookshelf that was fairly groaning with 
Hesse, Tolkien, and Reader’s Digest condensed books. The latter belonged to the parents, 

I assumed. We toked up. The grass was much smoother in the water pipe, and I could hold 
the smoke better. I began to get very high indeed. My head was filling up with helium. 
People came and went. Introductions, which I promptly forgot, were made. The thing that 
I liked best about the introductions was that, every time a stray wandered by, Dana would 
bounce up to grab him or her. And when she did, I could look straight up her dress to 
where the Heavenly Home was sheathed in the gauziest of blue nylon. People changed 



records. I watched them come and go (some of them undoubtedly talking of Michelangelo, 
or Ted Kennedy or Kurt Vonnegut). A woman asked me if I had read Susan Brownmiller’s 
Women Rapists. I said no. She told me it was very tight. She crossed her fingers in front of 
her eyes to show me how tight it was and then wandered off. I watched the fluorescent 
poster on the far wall, which showed a guy in a T-shirt sitting in front of a TV. The guy’s 
eyeballs were slowly dripping down his cheeks, and there was a big cheese-eating grin on 
his face. The poster said: SHEEEIT! FRIDAY NIGHT AND I’M STONED AGAIN 

I watched Dana cross and uncross her legs. A few filaments of pubic hair, nine shades 
darker than the bleach job, had strayed out of the lacy leg bands. I don’t think I have ever 
been that horny. I doubt if I will ever be that horny again. I had an organ which felt large 
enough and long enough to pole-vault on. I began to wonder if the male sex organ can 
explode. 

She turned to mg and suddenly whispered in my ear. My stomach heated up twenty 
degrees instantly, as if I had been eating chili. A moment before, she had been talking to 
Pete and to some joker I remembered being non-introduced to. Then she was whispering 
in my ear, her breath tickling the dark channel. “Go on out the back door,” she said. 
“There.” She pointed. 

It was hard to comprehend, so I just followed her finger. Yes, there was the door. The 
door was real and the door was earnest. It had one hell of a knob on it. I chuckled, 
convinced that I had just thought a particularly witty thought. She laughed lightly in my 
ear and said, “You’ve been looking up my dress all night. What does that mean?” And 
before I could say anything, she kissed my cheek softly and gave me a little shove to get 
me going. 

I looked around for Joe, but I didn’t see him anyplace. Sorry, Joe. I got up and heard 
both my knees pop. My legs were stiff from sitting in the same position so long. I had an 
urge to un-tuck my shirt and cover up the huge bulge in my jeans. I had an urge to tiptoe 
across the room. I had an urge to cackle wildly and announce to the general attendance 
that Charles Everett Decker earnestly believed that he was about to get screwed; that-to 
drop a bad pun-Charles Everett Decker was about to rip off his maiden piece. 

I didn’t do any of those things. 

I went out the back door. 

I was so stoned and so horny that I almost fell twenty feet to the tiny white shingle of 
beach that was down below. The back of the cabin overlooked a sudden rocky drop to a 
postage-stamp inlet. A flight of weather-washed steps led down. I walked carefully, 
holding on to the railing. My feet felt a thousand miles away. The music sounded distant 
on this side, blending and almost being covered by the rhythmic sound of the waves. 

There was a slip of a moon and a ghost of a breeze. The scene was so frozenly beautiful 
that for a moment I thought I had walked into a black-and-white picture postcard. The 
cabin behind and above was only a dim blur. The trees climbed on both sides, pines and 
spruces that sloped off to naked rock headland-twin spurs of it, which cupped the crescent¬ 
shaped beach where the waves licked. Straight ahead was the Atlantic, pinpointed with 
uncertain nets of light from the moon. I could see the faintest curve of an island far out to 



the left, and wondered who walked there that night besides the wind. It was a lonesome 
thought, and it made me shiver a little. 

I slipped off my shoes and waited for her. 

I don’t know how long it was before she came. I didn’t have any wristwatch and was too 
stoned to be able to judge in any case. And after a little while, unease began to creep in. 
Something about the shadow of trees on the wet, packed sand, and the sound of the wind. 
Maybe the ocean itself, a big thing, a mean mother-humper full of unseen life and all those 
little pricks of light. Maybe the cold feel of the sand under my bare feet. Maybe none of 
those things, maybe all of them and more. But by the time she put her hand on my 
shoulder, I had lost my erection. Wyatt Earp striding into the OK Corral with no sixgun. 

She turned me around, stood on tiptoe, kissed me. I could feel the warmth of her thighs, 
but now it was nothing special to me. “I saw you looking at me,” is what she said. “Are 
you nice? Can you be nice?” 

“I can try,” I told her, feeling a little absurd. I touched her breasts, and she held me close. 
But my erection was still gone. 

“Don’t tell Pete,” she said, taking me by the hand. “He’d kill me. We’ve got a ... kind of 
a thing.” 

She led me underneath the back steps, where the grass was cool and matted with 
aromatic pine needles. The shadows made cold Venetian blinds on her body as she slipped 
out of her dress. 

“This is so crazy,” she said, and she sounded excited. 

Then we were rolling together and my shirt was off. She was working at the snap on the 
front of my jeans. But my cock was still on coffee break. She touched me, sliding her hand 
inside my underpants, and the muscles down there jerked-not in pleasure or in revulsion, 
but in a kind of terror. Her hand felt like rubber, cold and impersonal and antiseptic. 

“Come on,” she whispered. “Come on, come on, come on ... “ 

I tried to think of something sexy, anything sexy. Looking up Darleen Andreissen’s skirt 
in study hall and her knowing it and letting me. Maynard Quinn’s pack of dirty French 
playing cards. I thought of Sandy Cross in sexy black underwear, and that started to move 
something around down there ... and then, of all things to come cruising out of my 
imagination, I saw my father with his hunting knife, talking about the Cherokee Nose Job. 

[“The what?” Corky Herald asked. I explained the Cherokee Nose Job. “Oh,” Corky 
said. I went on.] 

That did it. Everything collapsed into noodledom again. And after that, there was 
nothing. And nothing. And nothing. My jeans had joined my shirt. My underpants were 
somewhere down around my ankles. She was quivering underneath me, I could feel her, 
like the plucked string of a musical instrument. I reached down and took hold of my penis 
and shook it as if to ask what was wrong with it. But Mr. Penis wasn’t talking. I let my 
hand wander around to the warm junction of her thighs. I could feel her pubic hair, a little 
kinky, shockingly like my own. I slid an exploratory finger into her, thinking: This is the 



place. This is the place men like my father joke about on hunting trips and in barber 
shops. Men kill for this. Force it open. Steal it or bludgeon it. Take it... or leave it. 

“Where is it?” Dana whispered in a high, breathless voice. “Where is it? Where ... ?” 

Sol tried. But it was like that old joke about the guy that tried to jam a marshmallow 
into the piggy bank. Nothing. And all the time I could hear the soft sound of the ocean 
grounding on the beach, like the soundtrack of a sappy movie. 

Then I rolled off. “I’m sorry.” My voice was shockingly loud, rasping. 

I could hear her sigh. It was a short sound, an irritated sound. “All right,” she said. “It 
happens.” 

“Not to me,” I said, as if this was the first time in several thousand sexual encounters 
that my equipment had malfunctioned. Dimly I could hear Mick Jagger and the Stones 
shouting out “Hot Stuff.” One of life’s little ironies. I still felt wrecked, but it was a cold 
feeling, depthless. The cold certainty that I was queer crept over me like rising water. I had 
read someplace that you didn’t have to have any overt homosexual experience to be queer; 
you could just be that way and never know it until the queen in your closet leaped out at 
you like Norman Bates’s mom in Psycho, a grotesque mugger prancing and mincing in 
Mommy’s makeup and Mommy’s shoes. 

“It’s just as well,” she said. “Pete-” 

“Look, I’m sorry.” 

She smiled, but it looked manufactured. I’ve wondered since if it was or not. I’d like to 
believe it was a real smile. “It’s the dope. I bet you’re a hell of a lover when things are 
right.” 

“Fuck,” I said, and shivered at the dead sound in my own voice. 

“No.” She sat up. “I’m going back in. Wait until I’m gone awhile before you come up. “ 

I wanted to tell her to wait, to let me try it again, but I knew I couldn’t, not if all the seas 
dried up and the moon turned to zinc oxide. She zipped into her dress and was gone, 
leaving me there under the steps. The moon watched me closely, perhaps to see if I might 
cry. I didn’t. After a little while I got my clothes straightened around and most of last fall’s 
leaves brushed off me. Then I went back upstairs. Pete and Dana were gone. Joe was over 
in a corner, making out with a really stunning girl who had her hands in his mop of blond 
hair. I sat down and waited for the party to be over. Eventually it was. 

By the time the three of us got back to Bangor, dawn had already pulled most of her 
tricks out of her bag and a red edge of sun was peering down at us from between the 
smokestacks of beautiful downtown Brewer. None of us had much to say. I felt tired and 
grainy and not able to tell how much damage had been done to me. I had a leaden feeling 
that it was more than I really needed. 

We went upstairs, and I fell into the tiny daybed in the living room. The last thing I saw 
before I went to sleep was bars of sunlight falling through the Venetian blinds and onto the 
small throw rug by the radiator. 

I dreamed about the Creaking Thing. It was almost the same as when I was small, I in 



my bed, the moving shadows of the tree outside on the ceiling, the steady, sinister sound. 
Only, this time the sound kept getting closer and closer, until the door of the bedroom 
burst open with an awful crack like the sound of doom. 

It was my father. My mother was in his arms. Her nose had been slit wide open, and 
blood streamed down her cheeks like war paint. 

“You want her?” he said. “Here, take her, you worthless good-for-nothing. Take her. “ 

He threw her on the bed beside me and I saw that she was dead, and that’s when I woke 
up screaming. With an erection. 



Chapter 27 


Nobody had anything to say after that one, not even Susan Brooks. I felt tired. There 
didn’t seem to be a great deal left to say. Most of them were looking outside again, but 
there wasn’t anything to see that hadn’t been there an hour before-actually less, because 
all of the pedestrians had been shooed away. I decided Sandra’s sex story had been better. 
There had been an orgasm in hers. 

Ted Jones was staring at me with his usual burning intensity (I thought, however, that 
revulsion had given way entirely to hate, and that was mildly satisfying). Sandra Cross 
was off in her own world. Pat Fitzgerald was carefully folding a cheap piece of study-hall 
math paper into an aerodynamically unsound aircraft. 

Suddenly Irma Bates said defiantly, “I have to go to the bathroom!” 

I sighed. It sounded a great deal like the way I remember Dana Collette’s sigh at 
Schoodic Point. “Go, then.” 

She looked at me unbelievingly. Ted blinked. Don Lordi snickered. 

“You’d shoot me.” 

I looked at her. “Do you need to go to the crapper or not?” 

“I can hold it,” she said sulkily. 

I blew out my cheeks, the way my father does when he’s put out. “Well, either go or stop 
wiggling around in your seat. We don’t need a puddle underneath your desk.” 

Corky went haw-haw at that. Sarah Pasterne looked shocked. 

As if to spite me, Irma got up and walked with flat-footed vigor toward the door. I had 
gained at least one point: Ted was staring at her instead of me. Once there, she paused 
uncertainly, hand over the knob. She looked like someone who has just gotten an electric 
shock while adjusting the TV rabbit ears and is wondering whether or not to try again. 

“You won’t shoot me?” 

“Are you going to the bathroom or not?” I asked. I wasn’t sure if I was going to shoot 
her. I was still disturbed by (jealous of?) the fact that Sandra’s story seemed to have so 
much more power than my own. In some undefined way, they had gained the upper hand. 

I had the crazy feeling that instead of my holding them, it was the other way around. 
Except for Ted, of course. We were all holding Ted. 

Maybe I was going to shoot her. I certainly didn’t have anything to lose. Maybe it would 
even help. Maybe I could get rid of the crazy feeling that I had waked up in the middle of 
a new dream. 

She opened the door and went out. I never raised the gun off the blotter. The door 
closed. We could hear her feet moving off down the hall, not picking up tempo, not 
breaking into a run. They were all watching the door, as if something completely 
unbelievable had poked its head through, winked, and then withdrawn. 



For myself, I had a strange feeling of relief, a feeling so tenuous that I could never 
explain it. 

The footfalls died out. 

Silence. I waited for someone else to ask to go to the bathroom. I waited to see Irma 
Bates dash crazily out of the front doors and right onto the front pages of a hundred 
newspapers. It didn’t happen. 

Pat Fitzgerald rattled the wings of his plane. It was a loud sound. 

“Throw that goddamn thing away,” Billy Sawyer said irritably. “You can’t make a paper 
plane out of study-hall paper. ” Pat made no move to throw the goddamn thing away. Billy 
didn’t say anything else. 

New footfalls, coming toward us. 

I lifted up the pistol and pointed it toward the door. Ted was grinning at me, but I don’t 
think he knew it. I looked at his face, at the flat, conventionally good looking planes of his 
cheeks, at the forehead, barricading all those memories of summer country-club days, 
dances, cars, Sandy’s breasts, calmness, ideals of rightness; and suddenly I knew what the 
last order of business was; perhaps it had been the only order of business all along; and 
more importantly, I knew that his eye was the eye of a hawk and his hand was stone. He 
could have been my own father, but that didn’t matter. He and Ted were both remote and 
Olympian: gods. But my arms were too tired to pull down temples. I was never cut out to 
be Samson. 

His eyes were so clear and so straight, so frighteningly purposeful-they were politician’s 
eyes. 

Five minutes before, the sound of the footfalls wouldn’t have been bad, do you see? Five 
minutes before, I could have welcomed them, put the gun down on the desk blotter and 
gone to meet them, perhaps with a fearful backward glance at the people I was leaving 
behind me. But now it was the steps themselves that frightened me. I was afraid Philbrick 
had decided to take me up on my offer-that he had come to shut off the main line and 
leave our business unfinished. 

Ted Jones grinned hungrily. 

The rest of us waited, watching the door. Pat’s fingers had frozen on his paper plane. 
Dick Keene’s mouth hung open, and in that moment I could see for the first time the 
family resemblance between him and his brother Flapper, a borderline IQ case who had 
graduated after six long years in Placerville. Flapper was now doing postgraduate work at 
Thomaston State Prison, doing doctoral work in laundry maintenance and advanced spoon 
sharpening. 

An unformed shadow rose up on the glass, the way it does when the surface is pebbly 
and opaque. I lifted the pistol to high port and got ready. I could see the class out of the 
corner of my right eye, watching with absorbed fascination, the way you watch the last 
reel of a James Bond movie, when the body count really soars. 

A clenched sound, sort of a whimper, came out of my throat. 



The door opened, and Irma Bates came back in. She looked around peevishly, not happy 
to find everyone staring at her. George Yannick began to giggle and said, “Guess who’s 
coming to dinner.” It didn’t make anyone else laugh; it was George’s own private yuck. 
The rest of us just went on staring at Irma. 

“What are you looking at me for?” she asked crossly, holding the knob. “People do go to 
the bathroom, didn’t you know that?” She shut the door, went to her seat, and sat down 
primly. 

It was almost noon. 



Chapter 28 


Frank Philbrick was right on time. Chink, and he was on the horn. He didn’t seem to be 
puffing and blowing as badly, though. Maybe he wanted to placate me. Or maybe he’d 
thought over my advice on his speaking voice and had decided to take it. Stranger things 
have happened. God knows. 

“Decker?” 

“I’m here.” 

“Listen, that stray shot that came through the window wasn’t intentional. One of the men 
from Lewiston-” 

“Let’s not even bother, Frank,” I said. “You’re embarrassing me and you’re 
embarrassing these people down here, who saw what happened. If you’ve got any integrity 
at all, and I’m sure you do, you’re probably embarrassing yourself.” 

Pause. Maybe he was collecting his temper. “Okay. What do you want?” 

“Not much. Everybody comes out at one o’clock this afternoon. In exactly”-I checked 
the wall clock-“fifty-seven minutes by the clock down here. Without a scratch. I guarantee 
it. “ 

“Why not now?” 

I looked at them. The air felt heavy and nearly solemn, as if between us we had written a 
contract in someone’s blood. 

I said carefully, “We have a final piece of business down here. We have to finish getting 
it on.” 

“What is it?” 

“It doesn’t concern you. But we all know what it is.” There wasn’t a pair of eyes that 
showed uncertainty. They knew, all right, and that was good, because it would save time 
and effort. I felt very tired. 

“Now, listen carefully, Philbrick, so we have no misunderstanding, while I describe the 
last act of this little comedy. In about three minutes, someone is going to pull down all the 
shades in here.” 

“No way they are, Decker.” He sounded very tough. 

I let the air whistle through my teeth. What an amazing man he was. No wonder he 
screwed up all his drive-safely spiels. “When are you going to get it through your head 
that I’m in charge?” I asked him. “Someone is going to pull the shades, Philbrick, and it 
won’t be me. So if you shoot someone, you can pin your badge to your ass and kiss them 
both good-bye. “ 

Nothing. 

“Silence gives consent,” I said, trying to sound merry. I didn’t feel merry. “I’m not going 
to be able to see what you’re doing either, but don’t get any clever ideas. If you do, some 



of these people are going to get hurt. If you sit until one, everything will be fine again and 
you’ll be the big brave policeman everybody knows you are. Now, how ‘bout it?” 

He paused for a long time. “I’m damned if you sound crazy,” he said finally. 

“How about it?” 

“How do I know you’re not going to change your mind, Decker? What if you want to try 
for two o’clock? Or three?” 

“How about it?” I asked inexorably. 

Another pause. “All right. But if you hurt any of those kids ...” 

“You’ll take away my Junior Achiever card. I know. Go away, Frank.” 

I could feel him wanting to say something warm, wonderful, and witty, something that 
would summarize his position for the ages, something like: Fuck off, Decker, or: Cram it 
up y’ass, Decker; but he didn’t quite dare. There were, after all, young girls down here. 
“One o’clock,” he repeated. The intercom went dead. A moment later he was walking 
across the grass. 

“What nasty little masturbation fantasies have you got lined up now, Charlie?” Ted 
asked, still grinning. 

“Why don’t you just cool it, Ted?” Harmon Jackson asked remotely. 

“Who will volunteer to close the shades?” I asked. Several hands went up. I pointed to 
Melvin Thomas and said, “Do it slowly. They’re probably nervous.” 

Melvin did it slowly. With the canvas shades pulled all the way down to the sills, the 
room took on a half-dreamlike drabness. Lackluster shadows clustered in the comers like 
bats that hadn’t been getting enough to eat. I didn’t like it. The shadows made me feel 
very jumpy indeed. 

I pointed to Tanis Gannon, who sat in the row of seats closest to the door. “Will you 
favor us with the lights?” 

She smiled shyly, like a deb, and went to the light switches. A moment later we had cold 
fluorescents, which were not much better than the shadows. I wished for the sun and the 
sight of blue sky, but said nothing. There was nothing to say. Tanis went back to her seat 
and smoothed her skirt carefully behind her thighs as she sat down. 

“To use Ted’s adequate phrase,” I said, “there is only one masturbation fantasy left 
before we get down to business-or two halves of one whole, if you want to look at it that 
way. That is the story of Mr. Carlson, our late teacher of chemistry and physics, the story 
that good old Tom Denver managed to keep out of the papers but which, as the saying 
goes, remains in our hearts. 

“And how my father and I got it on following my suspension.” 

I looked at them, feeling a dull, horrid ache in the back of my skull. Somewhere it had 
all slipped out of my hands. I was reminded of Mickey Mouse as the sorcerer’s apprentice 
in the old Disney cartoon Fantasia. I had brought all the brooms to life, but now where 
was the kindly old magician to say abracadabra backwards and make them go back to 



sleep? 

Stupid, stupid. 

Pictures whirled in front of my eyes, hundreds of them, fragments from dreams, 
fragments from reality. It was impossible to separate one from the other. Lunacy is when 
you can’t see the seams where they stitched the world together anymore. I supposed there 
was still a chance that I might wake up in my bed, safe and still at least half-sane, the 
black, irrevocable step not taken (or at least not yet), with all the characters of this 
particular nightmare retreating back into their subconscious caves. But I wasn’t banking 
on it. 

Pat Fitzgerald’s brown hands worked on his paper plane like the sad, moving fingers of 
death itself. 

I said: 



Chapter 29 


There was no one reason why I started carrying the pipe wrench to school. 

Now, even after all of this, I can’t isolate the major cause. My stomach was hurting all 
the time, and I used to imagine people were trying to pick fights with me even when they 
weren’t. I was afraid I might collapse during physical-education calisthenics, and wake up 
to see everybody around me in a ring, laughing and pointing ... or maybe having a circle 
jerk. I wasn’t sleeping very well. I’d been having some goddamn funny dreams, and it 
scared me, because quite a few of them were wet dreams, and they weren’t the kind that 
you’re supposed to wake up after with a wet sheet. There was one where I was walking 
through the basement of an old castle that looked like something out of an old Universal 
Pictures movie. There was a coffin with the top up, and when I looked inside I saw my 
father with his hands crossed on his chest. He was neatly decked out-pun intended, I 
guess-in his dress Navy uniform, and there was a stake driven into his crotch. He opened 
his eyes and smiled at me. His teeth were fangs. In another one my mother was giving me 
an enema and I was begging her to hurry because Joe was outside waiting for me. Only, 

Joe was there, looking over her shoulder, and he had his hands on her breasts while she 
worked the little red rubber bulb that was pumping soapsuds into my ass. There were 
others, featuring a cast of thousands, but I don’t want to go into them. It was all Napoleon 
XIV stuff. 

I found the pipe wrench in the garage, in an old toolbox. It wasn’t a very big piece, but 
there was a rust-clotted socket on one end. And it hefted heavy in my hand. It was winter 
then, and I used to wear a big bulky sweater to school every day. I have an aunt that sends 
me two of those every year, birthday and Christmas. She knits them, and they always 
come down below my hips. So I started to carry the pipe wrench in my back pocket. It 
went everyplace with me. If anyone ever noticed, they never said. For a little while, it 
evened things up, but not for long. There were days when I came home feeling like a 
guitar string that has been tuned five octaves past its proper position. On those days I’d 
say hi to Mom, then go upstairs and either weep or giggle into my pillow until it felt as if 
all my guts were going to blow up. That scared me. When you do things like that, you are 
ready for the loony bin. 

The day that I almost killed Mr. Carlson was the third of March. It was raining, and the 
last of the snow was just trickling away in nasty little rivulets. I guess I don’t have to go 
into what happened, because most of you were there and saw it. I had the pipe wrench in 
my back pocket. Carlson called me up to do a problem on the board, and I’ve always hated 
that-I’m lousy in chemistry. It made me break out in a sweat every time I had to go up to 
that board. 

It was something about weight-stress on an inclined plane, I forget just what, but I 
fucked it all up. I remember thinking he had his fucking gall, getting me up here in front 
of everybody to mess around with an inclined-plane deal, which was really a physics 
problem. He probably had it left over from his last class. And he started to make fun of 
me. He was asking me if I remembered what two and two made, if I’d ever heard of long 



division, wonderful invention, he said, ha-ha, a regular Henry Youngman. When I did it 
wrong for the third time he said, “Well, that’s just woonderful, Charlie. Woooonderful. ” 

He sounded just like Dicky Cable. He sounded so much like him that I turned around fast 
to look. He sounded so much like him that I reached for my back pocket where that pipe 
wrench was tucked away, before I even thought. My stomach was all drawn up tight, and I 
thought I was just going to lean down and blow my cookies all over the floor. 

I hit the back pocket with my hand, and the pipe wrench fell out. It hit the floor and 
clanged. 

Mr. Carlson looked at it. “Now, just what is that?” he asked, and started to reach for it. 

“Don’t touch it,” I said, and reached down and grabbed it for myself. 

“Let me see it, Charlie.” He put his hand out for it. 

I felt as if I were going in twelve different directions at once. Part of my mind was 
screaming at me-really, actually screaming, like a child in a dark room where there are 
horrible, grinning boogeymen. 

“Don’t,” I said. And everybody was looking at me. All of them staring. 

“You can give it to me or you can give it to Mr. Denver,” he said. 

And then a funny thing happened to me ... except, when I think about it, it wasn’t funny 
at all. There must be a line in all of us, a very clear one, just like the line that divides the 
light side of a planet from the dark. I think they call that line the terminator. That’s a very 
good word for it. Because at one moment I was freaking out, and at the next I was as cool 
as a cucumber. 

“I’ll give it to you, skinner,” I said, and thumped the socket end into my palm. “Where 
do you want it?” 

He looked at me with his lips pursed. With those heavy tortoiseshell glasses he wore, he 
looked like some kind of bug. Avery stupid kind. The thought made me smile. I thumped 
the business end of the wrench into my palm again. 

“All right, Charlie,” he said. “Give that thing to me and then go up to the office. I’ll 
come up after class.” 

“Eat shit,” I said, and swung the pipe wrench behind me. It thocked against the slate skin 
of the blackboard, and little chips flew out. There was yellow chalk dust on the socket end, 
but it didn’t seem any worse for the encounter. Mr. Carlson, on the other hand, winced as 
though it had been his mother I’d hit instead of some fucking torture-machine blackboard. 
It was quite an insight into his character, I can tell you. So I hit the blackboard again. And 
again. 

“Charlie!” 

“It’s a treat... to beat your meat... on the Mississippi mud,” I sang, whacking the 
blackboard in time. Every time I hit it, Mr. Carlson jumped. Every time Mr. Carlson 
jumped, I felt a little better. Transitional action analysis, baby. Dig it. The Mad Bomber, 
that poor sad sack from Waterbury, Connecticut, must have been the most well-adjusted 
American of the last quarter-century. 



“Charlie, I’ll see that you’re suspen-” 

I turned around and began to whack away at the chalk ledge. I had already made a hell 
of a hole in the board itself; it wasn’t such a tough board at that, not once you had its 
number. Erasers and chalk fell on the floor, puffing up dust. I was just on the brink of 
realizing you could have anybody’s number if you held a big enough stick when Mr. 
Carlson grabbed me. 

I turned around and hit him. Just once. There was a lot of blood. He fell on the floor, and 
his tortoiseshell glasses fell off and skated about eight feet. I think that’s what broke the 
spell, the sight of those glasses sliding across the chalk-dusty floor, leaving his face bare 
and defenseless, looking the way it must look when he was asleep. I dropped the pipe 
wrench on the floor and walked out without looking back. I went upstairs and told them 
what I had done. 

Jerry Kesserling picked me up in a patrol car and they sent Mr. Carlson to Central Maine 
General Hospital, where an X ray showed that he had a hairline fracture just above the 
frontal lobe. I understand they picked four splinters of bone out of his brain. A few dozen 
more, and they could have put them together with airplane glue so they spelled ASSHOLE 
and given it to him for his birthday with my compliments. 

There were conferences. Conferences with my father, with good old Tom, with Don 
Grace, and with every possible combination and permutation of the above. I conferenced 
with everybody but Mr. Fazio, the janitor. Through it all my father kept admirably calm- 
my mother would come out of the house and was on tranquilizers-but every now and then 
during these civilized conversations, he would turn an icy, speculative eye on me that I 
knew eventually we would be having our own conference. He could have killed me 
cheerfully with his bare hands. In a simpler time, he might have done it. 

There was a very touching apology to a bandage-wrapped, black-eyed Mr. Carlson and 
his stony-eyed wife (” ... distraught... haven’t been myself ... sorrier than I can say ... “), 
but I got no apology for being badgered in front of the chemistry class as I stood sweating 
at the blackboard with all the numbers looking like fifth-century Punic. No apology from 
Dicky Cable or Dana Collette. Or from your Friendly Neighborhood Creaking Thing who 
told me through tight lips on the way home from the hospital that he wanted to see me out 
in the garage after I had changed my clothes. 

I thought about that as I took off my sport jacket and my best slacks and put on jeans 
and an old chambray workshirt. I thought about not going-just heading off down the road 
instead. I thought about just going out and taking it. Something in me rebelled at that. I 
had been suspended. I had spent five hours in a holding cell in Placerville Center before 
my father and my hysterical mother (“Why did you do it, Charlie? Why? Why?”) forked 
over the bail money-the charges, at the joint agreement of the school, the cops, and Mr. 
Carlson (not his wife; she had been hoping I’d get at least ten years), had been dropped 
later. 

One way or the other, I thought my father and I owed each other something. And so I 
went out to the garage. 

It’s a musty, oil-smelling place, but completely trim. Shipshape. It’s his place, and he 



keeps it that way. A place for everything, and everything in its place. Yoho-ho, matey. The 
riding lawnmower placed neatly with its nose against the wall. The gardening and 
landscaping tools neatly hung up on nails. Jar tops nailed to the roof beams so jars of nails 
could be screwed into them at eye level. Stacks of old magazines neatly tied up with 
twine-Argosy, Bluebook, True, Saturday Evening Post. The ranch wagon neatly parked 
facing out. 

He was standing there in an old faded pair of twill khakis and a hunting shirt. For the 
first time, I noticed how old he was starting to look. His belly had always been as flat as a 
two-by-four, but now it was bulging out a little-too many beers down at Gogan’s. There 
seemed to be more veins in his nose burst out into little purple deltas under the skin, and 
the lines around his mouth and eyes were deeper. 

“What’s your mother doing?” he asked me. 

“Sleeping, ” I said. She had been sleeping a lot, with the help of a Librium prescription. 
Her breath was sour and dry with it. It smelled like dreams gone rancid. 

“Good,” he said, nodding. “That’s how we want it, isn’t it?” 

He started taking off his belt. 

“I’m going to take the hide off you,” he said. 

“No,” I said. “You’re not.” 

He paused, the belt half out of the loops. “What?” 

“If you come at me with that thing, I’m going to take it away from you,” I said. My 
voice was trembling and uneven. “I’m going to do it for the time you threw me on the 
ground when I was little and then lied about it to Mom. I’m going to do it for every time 
you belted me across the face for doing something wrong, without giving me a second 
chance. I’m going to do it for that hunting trip when you said you’d slit her nose open if 
you ever caught her with another man.” 

He had gone a deadly pale. Now it was his voice trembling. “You gutless, spineless 
wonder. Do you think you can blame this on me? You go tell that to that pansy psychiatrist 
if you want to, that one with the pipe. Don’t try it on me.” 

“You stink,” I said. “You fucked up your marriage and you fucked up your only child. 
You come on and try to take me if you think you can. I’m out of school. Your wife’s 
turning into a pinhead. You’re nothing but a booze-hound.” I was crying. “You come on 
and try it, you dumb fuck. “ 

“You better stop it, Charlie,” he said. “Before I stop just wanting to punish you and start 
wanting to kill you. “ 

“Go ahead and try,” I said, crying harder. “I’ve wanted to kill you for thirteen years. I 
hate your guts. You suck. “ 

So then he came at me like something out of a slave-exploitation movie, one end of his 
Navy-issue belt wrapped in his fist, the other end, the buckle end, dangling down. He 
swung it at me, and I ducked. It went by my shoulder and hit the hood of his Country 
Squire wagon with a hard clank, scoring the finish. His tongue was caught between his 



teeth, and his eyes were bulging. He looked the way he had that day I broke the storm 
windows. Suddenly I wondered if that was the way he looked when he made love to my 
mother (or what passed for it); if that’s what she had to look up at while she was pinned 
under him. The thought froze me with such a bolt of disgusted revelation that I forgot to 
duck the next one. 

The buckle came down alongside my face, ripped into my cheek, pulling it open in a 
long furrow. It bled a lot. It felt like the side of my face and neck had been doused in 
warm water. 

“Oh, God,” he said. “Oh, God, Charlie.” 

My eye had watered shut on that side, but I could see him coming toward me with the 
other. I stepped to meet him and grabbed the end of the belt and pulled. He wasn’t 
expecting it. It jerked him off balance, and when he started to run a little to catch it back, I 
tripped him up and he thumped to the oil-stained concrete floor. Maybe he had forgotten I 
wasn’t four anymore, or nine years old and cowering in a tent, having to take a whiz while 
he yucked it up with his friends. Maybe he had forgotten or never knew that little boys 
grow up remembering every blow and word of scorn, that they grow up and want to eat 
their fathers alive. 

A harsh little grunt escaped him as he hit the concrete. He opened his hands to break his 
fall, and I had the belt. I doubled it and brought it down on his broad khaki ass. It made a 
loud smack, and it probably didn’t hurt much, but he cried out in surprise, and I smiled. It 
hurt my cheek to smile. He had really beaten the shit out of my cheek. 

He got up warily. “Charlie, put that down,” he said. “Let’s take you to the doctor and get 
that stitched up. “ 

“You better say yes-sir to the Marines you see if your own kid can knock you down,” I 
said. 

That made him mad, and he lunged at me, and I hit him across the face with the belt. He 
put his hands up to his face, and I dropped the belt and hit him in the stomach as hard as I 
could. The air whiffled out of him, and he doubled over. His belly was soft, even softer 
than it had looked. I didn’t know whether to feel disgust or pity suddenly. It occurred to 
me that the man I really wanted to hurt was safely out of my reach, standing behind a 
shield of years. 

He straightened up, looking pale and sick. There was a red mark across his forehead 
where I had hit him with the belt. 

“Okay,” he said, and turned around. He pulled a hardhead rake off the wall. “If that’s 
how you want it. “ 

I reached out beside me and pulled the hatchet off the wall and held it up with one hand. 

“That’s how I want it,” I said. “Take one step, and I’ll cut your head off, if I can. “ 

So we stood there, trying to figure out if we meant it. Then he put the take back, and I 
put the hatchet back. There was no love in it, no love in the way we looked at each other. 
He didn’t say, “If you’d had the guts to do that five years ago, none of this would have 



happened, son ... come on, I’ll take you down to Gogan’s and buy you a beer in the back 
room.” And I didn’t say I was sorry. It happened because I got big enough, that was all. 
None of it changed anything. Now I wish it was him I’d killed, if I had to kill anyone. This 
thing on the floor between my feet is a classic case of misplaced aggression. 

“Come on,” he said. “Let’s get that stitched up.” 

“I can drive myself. “ 

“I’ll drive you.” 

And so he did. We went down to the emergency room in Brunswick, and the doctor put 
six stitches in my cheek, and I told him that I had tripped over a chunk of stove wood in 
the garage and cut my cheek on a fireplace screen my dad was blacking. We told Mom the 
same thing. And that was the end of it. We never discussed it again. He never tried to tell 
me what to do again. We lived in the same house, but we walked in wide circles around 
each other, like a pair of old toms. If I had to guess, I’d say he’ll get along without me 
very well ... like the song says. 

During the second week of April they sent me back to school with the warning that my 
case was still under consideration and I would have to go see Mr. Grace every day. They 
acted like they were doing me a favor. Some favor. It was like being popped back into the 
cabinet of Dr. Caligari. 

It didn’t take as long to go bad this time. The way people looked at me in the halls. The 
way I knew they were talking about me in the teachers’ rooms. The way nobody would 
even talk to me anymore except Joe. And I wasn’t very cooperative with Grace. 

Yes, folks, things got bad very fast indeed, and they went from bad to worse. But I’ve 
always been fairly quick on the uptake, and I don’t forget many lessons that I’ve learned 
well. I certainly learned the lesson about how you could get anyone’s number with a big 
enough stick. My father picked up the hardhead take, presumably planning to trepan my 
skull with it, but when I picked up the hatchet, he put it back. 

I never saw that pipe wrench again, but what the fuck. I didn’t need that anymore, 
because that stick wasn’t big enough. I’d known about the pistol in my father’s desk for 
ten years. Near the end of April I started to carry it to school. 



Chapter 30 


I looked up at the wall clock. It was 12:30.1 drew in all my mental breath and got ready 
to sprint down the homestretch. 

“So ends the short, brutal saga of Charles Everett Decker,” I said. “Questions?” 

Susan Brooks said very quietly in the dim room, “I’m sorry for you, Charlie.” It was like 
the crack of damnation. 

Don Lordi was looking at me in a hungry way that reminded me of Jaws for the second 
time that day. Sylvia was smoking the last cigarette in her pack. Pat Fitzgerald labored on 
his plane, crimping the paper wings, the usual funny-sly expression gone from his face, 
replaced by something that was wooden and carved. Sandra Cross still seemed to be in a 
pleasant daze. Even Ted Jones seemed to have his mind on other matters, perhaps on a 
door he had forgotten to latch when he was ten, or a dog he might once have kicked. 

“If that’s all, then it brings us to the final order of business in our brief but enlightening 
stay together,” I said. “Have you learned anything today? Who knows the final order of 
business? Let’s see.” 

I watched them. There was nothing. I was afraid it wouldn’t come, couldn’t come. So 
tight, so frozen, all of them. When you’re five and you hurt, you make a big noise unto the 
world. At ten you whimper. But by the time you make fifteen you begin to eat the 
poisoned apples that grow on your own inner tree of pain. It’s the Western Way of 
Enlightenment. You begin to cram your fists into your mouth to stifle the screams. You 
bleed on the inside. But they had gone so far ... 

And then Pig Pen looked up from his pencil. He was smiling a small, red-eyed smile, the 
smile of a ferret. His hand crept up into the air, the fingers still clenched around his cheap 
writing instrument. Be-bop-a-lula, she’s my baby. 

So then it was easier for the rest of them. One electrode begins to arc and sputter, and- 
yoiks!-look, professor, the monster walks tonight. 

Susan Brooks put her hand up next. Then there were several together: Sandra raised 
hers, Grace Stanner raised hers-delicately-and Irma Bates did likewise. Corky. Don. Pat. 
Sarah Pasterne. Some smiling a little, most of them solemn. Tanis. Nancy Caskin. Dick 
Keene and Mike Gavin, both renowned in the Placerville Greyhounds’ backfield. George 
and Harmon, who played chess together in study hall. Melvin Thomas. Anne Lasky. At 
the end all of them were up-all but one. 

I called on Carol Granger, because I thought she deserved her moment. You would have 
thought that she might have had the most trouble making the switch, crossing the 
terminator, so to speak, but she had done it almost effortlessly, like a girl shedding her 
clothes in the bushes after dusk had come to the class picnic. 

“Carol?” I said. “What’s the answer?” 

She thought about how to word it. She put a finger up to the small dimple beside her 
mouth as she thought, and there was a furrow in her milk-white brow. 



“We have to help,” she said. “We have to help show Ted where he has gone wrong. “ 

That was a very tasteful way to put it, I thought. 

“Thank you, Carol,” I said. 

She blushed. 

I looked at Ted, who had come back to the here and now. He was glaring again, but in 
kind of a confused way. 

“I think the best thing,” I said, “would be if I became a sort of combination judge and 
public attorney. Everyone else can be witnesses; and of course, you’re the defendant, 

Ted.” 

Ted laughed wildly. “You,” he said. “Oh, Jesus, Charlie. Who do you think you are? 
You’re crazy as a bat. “ 

“Do you have a statement?” I asked him. 

“You’re not going to play tricks with me, Charlie. I’m not saying a darn thing. I’ll save 
my speech for when we get out of here.” His eyes swept his classmates accusingly and 
distrustfully. “And I’ll have a lot to say.” 

“You know what happens to squealers, Rocco,” I said in a tough Jimmy Cagney voice. I 
brought the pistol up suddenly, pointed it at his head, and screamed “BANG!” 

Ted shrieked in surprise. 

Anne Lasky laughed merrily. 

“Shut up! ” Ted yelled at her. 

“Don’t you tell me to shut up,” she said. “What are you so afraid of?” 

“What... ?” His jaw dropped. The eyes bulged. In that moment I felt a great deal of pity 
for him. The Bible says the snake tempted Eve with the apple. What would have happened 
if he had been forced to eat it himself? 

Ted half-rose from his seat, trembling. “What am I ... ? What am I ... ?” He pointed a 
shivering finger at Anne, who did not cringe at all. “YOU GODDAMN SILLY BITCH! 

HE HAS GOT A GUN! HE IS CRAZY! HE HAS SHOT TWO PEOPLE! DEAD! HE IS 
HOLDING US HERE!” 

“Not me, he isn’t,” Irma said. “I could have walked right out.” 

“We’ve learned some very good things about ourselves, Ted,” Susan said coldly. “I don’t 
think you’re being very helpful, closing yourself in and trying to be superior. Don’t you 
realize that this could be the most meaningful experience of our lives?” 

“He’s a killer,” Ted said tightly. “He killed two people. This isn’t TV. Those people 
aren’t going to get up and go off to their dressing rooms to wait for the next take. They’re 
really dead. He killed them.’ 

“Soul killer!” Pig Pen hissed suddenly. 

“Where the fuck do you think you get off?” Dick Keene asked. “All this just shakes the 
shit out of your tight little life, doesn’t it? You didn’t think anybody’d find out about you 



banging Sandy, did you? Or your mother. Ever think about her? You think you’re some 
kind of white knight. I’ll tell you what you are. You’re a cocksucker. “ 

“Witness! Witness!” Grace cried merrily, waving her hand. “Ted Jones buys girlie 
magazines. I’ve seen him in Ronnie’s Variety doing it.” 

“Beat off much, Ted?” Harmon asked. He was smiling viciously. 

“And you were a Star Scout,” Pat said dolorously. 

Ted twitched from them like a bear that has been tied to a post for the villagers’ 
amusement. “I don’t masturbate! ” he yelled. 

“Right,” Corky said disgustedly. 

“I bet you really stink in bed,” Sylvia said. She looked at Sandra. “Did he stink in bed?” 

“We didn’t do it in bed,” Sandra said. “We were in a car. And it was over so quick ... “ 

“Yeah, that’s what I figured.” 

“All right,” Ted said. His face was sweaty. He stood up. “I’m walking out of here. 
You’re all crazy. I’ll tell them ... ” He stopped and added with a strange and touching 
irrelevancy, “I never meant what I said about my mother. ” He swallowed. “You can shoot 
me, Charlie, but you can’t stop me. I’m going out.” 

I put the gun down on the blotter. “I have no intention of shooting you, Ted. But let me 
remind you that you haven’t really done your duty.” 

“That’s right,” Dick said, and after Ted had taken two steps toward the door, Dick came 
out of his seat, took two running steps of his own, and collared him. Ted’s face dissolved 
into utter amazement. 

“Hey, Dick,” he said. 

“Don’t you Dick me, you son of a bitch.” 

Ted tried to give him an elbow in the belly, and then his arms were pinned behind him, 
one by Pat and one by George Yannick. 

Sandra Cross got slowly out of her seat and walked to him, demurely, like a girl on a 
country road. Ted’s eyes were bulging, half-mad. I could taste what was coming, the way 
you can taste thunderheads before summer rain ... and the hail that comes with it 
sometimes. 

She stopped before him, and an expression of sly, mocking devotion crossed her face 
and was gone. She put a hand out, touched the collar of his shirt. The muscles of his neck 
bunched as he jerked away from her. Dick and Pat and George held him like springs. She 
reached slowly inside the open collar of the khaki shirt and began to pull it open, popping 
the buttons. There was no sound in the room but the tiny, flat tic-tic as the buttons fell to 
the floor and rolled. He was wearing no undershirt. His flesh was bare and smooth. She 
moved as if to kiss it, and he spit in her face. 

Pig Pen smiled from over Sandra’s shoulder, the grubby court jester with the king’s 
paramour. “I could put your eyes out,” he said. “Do you know that? Pop them out just like 
olives. Poink! Poink!” 



“Let me go! Charlie, make them let me-” 

“He cheats, ” Sarah Pasterne said loudly. “He always looks at my answer sheet in 
French. Always.” 

Sandra stood before him, now looking down, a sweet, murmurous smile barely curving 
the bow of her lips. The first two fingers of her right hand touched the slick spittle on her 
cheek lightly. 

“Here,” Billy Sawyer whispered. “Here’s something for you, handsome.” He crept up 
behind Ted on tippy-toe and suddenly pulled his hair. 

Ted screamed. 

“He cheats on the laps in gym, too,” Don said harshly. “You really quit football because 
you dint have no sauce, dintchoo?” 

“Please,” Ted said. “Please, Charlie.” He had begun to grin oddly, and his eyeballs were 
shiny with tears. Sylvia had joined the little circle around him. She might have been the 
one who goosed him, but I couldn’t really see. 

They were moving around him in a slow kind of dance that was nearly beautiful. Fingers 
pinched and pulled, questions were asked, accusations made. Irma Bates pushed a ruler 
down the back of his pants. Somehow his shirt was ripped off and flew to the back of the 
room in two tatters. Ted was breathing in great, high whoops. Anne Lasky began to rub 
the bridge of his nose with an eraser. Corky scurried back to his desk like a good mouse, 
found a bottle of Carter’s ink, and dumped it in his hair. Hands flew out like birds and 
mbbed it in briskly. 

Ted began to weep and talk in strange, unconnected phrases. 

“Soul brother?” Pat Fitzgerald asked. He was smiling, whacking Ted’s bare shoulders 
lightly with a notebook in cadence. “Be my soul brother? That right? Little Head Start? 
Little free lunch? That right? Hum? Hum? Brothers? Be soul brothers?” 

“Got your Silver Star, hero, ” Dick said, and raised his knee, placing it expertly in the 
big muscle of Ted’s thigh. 

Ted screamed. His eyes bulged and rolled toward me, the eyes of a horse staved on a 
high fence. “Please ... pleeeese, Charlie ... pleeeeeeeeee-” And then Nancy Caskin 
stuffed a large wad of notebook paper into his mouth. He tried to spit it out, but Sandra 
rammed it back in. 

“That will teach you to spit,” sire said reproachfully. 

Harmon knelt and pulled off one of his shoes. He rubbed it in Ted’s inky hair and then 
slammed the sole against Ted’s chest. It left a huge, grotesque footprint. 

“Admit one!” he crowed. 

Tentatively, almost demurely, Carol stepped on Ted’s stockinged foot and twisted her 
heel. Something in his foot snapped. Ted blubbered. 

He sounded like he was begging somewhere behind the paper, but you couldn’t really 
tell. Pig Pen darted in spiderlike and suddenly bit his nose. 



There was a sudden black pause. I noticed that I had turned the pistol around so that the 
muzzle was pointed at my head, but of course that would not be at all cricket. I unloaded it 
and put it carefully in the top drawer, on top of Mrs. Underwood’s plan book. I was quite 
confident that this had not been in today’s lesson plan at all. 

They were smiling at Ted, who hardly looked human at all anymore. In that brief flick of 
time, they looked like gods, young, wise, and golden. Ted did not look like a god. Ink ran 
down his cheeks in blue-black teardrops. The bridge of his nose was bleeding, and one eye 
glared disjointedly toward no place. Paper protruded through his teeth. He breathed in 
great white snuffles of air. 

I had time to think: We have got it on. Now we have got it all the way on. 

They fell on him. 



Chapter 31 


I had Corky pull up the shades before they left. He did it with quick, jerky motions. 

There were now what seemed like hundreds of cruisers out there, thousands of people. It 
was three minutes of one. 

The sunlight hurt my eyes. 

“Good-bye,” I said. 

“God-bye,” Sandra said. 

They all said good-bye, I think, before they went out. Their footfalls made a tunny, 
echoy noise going down the hall. I closed my eyes and imagined a giant centipede wearing 
Georgia Giants on each of its one hundred feet. When I opened them again, they were 
walking across the bright green of the lawn. I wished they had used the sidewalk; even 
after all that had happened, it was still a hell of a lawn. 

The last thing I remember seeing of them was that their hands were streaked with black 
ink. 

People enveloped them. 

One of the reporters, throwing caution to the winds, eluded three policemen and raced 
down to where they were, pell-mell. 

The last one to be swallowed up was Carol Granger. I thought she looked back, but I 
couldn’t tell for sure. Philbrick started to walk stolidly toward the school. Flashbulbs were 
popping all over the place. 

Time was short. I went over to where Ted was leaning against the green cinderblock 
wall. He was sitting with his legs splayed out below the bulletin board, which was full of 
notices from the Mathematical Society of America, which nobody ever read, Peanuts 
comic strips (the acme of humor, in the late Mrs. Underwood’s estimation), and a poster 
showing Bertrand Russell and a quote: “Gravity alone proves the existence of God. ” But 
any undergraduate in creation could have told Bertrand that it has been conclusively 
proved that there is no gravity; the earth just sucks. 

I squatted beside Ted. I pulled the crumpled wad of math paper out of his mouth and laid 
it aside. Ted began to drool. 

“Ted. “ 

He looked past me, over my shoulder. 

“Ted,” I said, and patted his cheek gently. 

He shrank away. His eyes rolled wildly. 

“You’re going to get better,” I said. “You’re going to forget this day ever happened. “ 

Ted made mewling sounds. 

“Or maybe you won’t. Maybe you’ll go on from here, Ted. Build from this. Is that such 
an impossible idea?” 



It was, for both of us. And being so close to Ted had begun to make me very nervous. 

The intercom chinked open. It was Philbrick. He was puffing and blowing again. 

“Decker?” 

“Right here.” 

“Come out with your hands up.” 

I sighed. “You come down and get me, Philbrick, old sport. I’m pretty goddamn tired. 
This psycho business is a hell of a drain on the glands.” 

“All right,” he said, tough. “TheyTl be shooting in the gas canisters in just about one 
minute.” 

“Better not, ” I said. I looked at Ted. Ted didn’t look back; he just kept on looking into 
emptiness. Whatever he saw there must have been mighty tasty, because he was still 
drooling down his chin. “You forgot to count noses. There’s still one of them down here. 
He’s hurt.” That was something of an understatement. 

His voice was instantly wary. “Who?” 

“Ted Jones.” 

“How is he hurt?” 

“Stubbed his toe. “ 

“He’s not there. You’re lying.” 

“I wouldn’t lie to you, Philbrick, and jeopardize our beautiful relationship. “ 

No answer. Puff, snort, blow. 

“Come on down,” I invited. “The gun is unloaded. It’s in a desk drawer. We can play a 
couple of cribbage hands, then you can take me out and tell all the papers how you did it 
single-handed. You might even make the cover of Time if we work it right. “ 

Chink. He was off the com. 

I closed my eyes and put my face in my hands. All I saw was gray. Nothing but gray. 

Not even a flash of white light. For no reason at all, I thought of New Year’s Eve, when all 
those people crowd into Times Square and scream like jackals as the lighted ball slides 
down the pole, ready to shed its thin party glare on three hundred and sixty-five new days 
in this best of all possible worlds. I have always wondered what it would be like to be 
caught in one of those crowds, screaming and not able to hear your own voice, your 
individuality momentarily wiped out and replaced with the blind empathic overslop of the 
crowd’s lurching, angry anticipation, hip to hip and shoulder to shoulder with no one in 
particular. 

I began to cry. 

When Philbrick stepped through the door, he glanced down at the drooling Tedthing and 
then up at me. “What in the name of God did you ... ?” he began. 

I made as if to grab something behind Mrs. Underwood’s desktop row of books and 
plants. “Here it comes, you shit cop!” I screamed. 



He shot me three times. 



Chapter 32 


THOSE WHO WOULD BE INFORMED IN THIS MATTER DRAW YE NEAR AND 
KNOW YE THEN BY THESE PRESENTS: 

CHARLES EVERETT DECKER, convicted in Superior Court this day, August 27, 
1976, of the willful murder of Jean Alice Underwood, and also convicted this day, August 
27, 1976, of the willful murder of John Downes Vance, both human beings. 


It has been determined by five state psychiatrists that Charles Everett Decker cannot at 
this time be held accountable for his actions, by reason of insanity. It is therefore the 
decision of this court that he be remanded to the Augusta State Hospital, where he will be 
held in treatment until such time as he can be certified responsible to answer for his acts. 

To this writ have I set my hand. 

(Signed) 

(Judge) Samuel K. N. Deleavney 
In other words, until shit sticks on the moon, baby. 



Chapter 33 


interoffice memo 


FROM: Dr. Andersen 

TO: Rich Gossage, Admin. Wing 

SUBJECT: Theodore Jones 


Rich, 

Am still loath to try the shock treatments on this boy, altho I can’t explain it even to 
myself-call it hunch. Of course I can’t justify hunch to the board of directors, or to Jones’s 
uncle, who is footing the bill, which, in a private institution like Woodlands, don’t come 
cheap, as we both know. If there is no movement in the next four to six weeks, we’ll go on 
with the standard electroshock therapy, but for now I would like to run the standard drug 
schedule again, plus a few not so standard-I am thinking of both synthetic mescaline and 
psyilocybin, if you concur. Will Greenberger has had a great deal of success with semi- 
catatonic patients as you know, and these two hallucinogens have played a major part in 
his therapy. 

Jones is such a strange case-goddammit, if we only could be sure what had gone on in 
that classroom after that Decker individual had the shades pulled down! 

Diagnosis hasn’t changed. Flat-line catatonic state w /some signs of deterioration. 

I might as well admit to you up front, Rich, that I am not as hopeful for this boy as I 
once was. 


November 3, 1976 



Chapter 34 


December 5, 1976 

Dear Charlie, 

They tell me you can have mail now, so I thought I would drop you a line. Maybe you 
noticed this is postmarked Boston-your old buddy finally made the Big Time, and I’m 
taking sixteen hours here at B.U. (that stands for Bullshit Unlimited). It’s ah pretty slushy 
except for my English class. The instructor assigned us a book called The Postman Always 
Rings Twice that was really good, and I got an A on the exam. It’s by James Cain, did you 
ever read it? I’m thinking about majoring in English, how’s that for a laugh? Must be your 
influence. And you were always the brains of the combination. 

I saw your mom just before I left Placerville, and she said you were just about ah healed 
up and the last of the drains were out three weeks ago. I was sure glad to hear it. She said 
you aren’t talking much. That doesn’t sound like you, skinner. It would sure be a loss to 
the world if you clammed up and just scrunched in a comer all day. 

Although I haven’t been home since the semester started, Sandy Cross wrote me a letter 
with a lot of news about all the people at home. (Will the bastards censor this part? I bet 
they read ah your mail.) Sandy herself decided not to go to college this year. She’s just 
sort of hanging around, waiting for something to happen, I guess. I might as well tell you 
that I dated her a couple of times last summer, but she just seemed kind of distant. She 
asked me to say “hi” to you, so “hi” from Sandy. 

Maybe you know what happened to Pig Pen, no one in town can believe it, about him 
and Dick Keene [following has been censored as possibly upsetting to patient], so you can 
never tell what people are going to do, can you? 

Carol Granger’s validictory (sp?) speech was reprinted by Seventeen magazine. As I 
remember, it was on “Self-Integrity and a Normal Response to It, ” or some such happy 
horseshit. We would have had some fun ranking that one out, right, Charlie? 

Oh, yeah, and Irma Bates is going out with some “hippie” from Lewiston. I guess they 
were even in a demonstration when Robt. Dole came to Portland to campaign in the 
presidential election stuff. They were arrested and then let go when Dole flew out. Mrs. 
Bates must be having birds about it. Can’t you just see Irma trying to brain Robt. Dole 
with a Gus Hall campaign sign? Ha-ha, that just kills me. We would have had some laughs 
over that one, too, Charlie. God, I miss your old cracked ass sometimes. 

Gracie Stanner, that cute little chick, is going to get married, and that’s also a local 
sensation. It boggles the mind. [Following has been censored as possibly upsetting to 
patient.] Anyway, you can never tell what sort of monkeyshines people are going to get up 
to, right? 

Well, guess that’s all for now. I hope they are treating you right, Ferd, as you’ve got to 
be out of there as soon as they’ll let you. And if they start letting you have visitors, I want 
you to know that I will be the first in line. 



There are a lot of us pulling for you, Charlie. Pulling hard. 
People haven’t forgotten. You know what I mean. 

You have to believe that. 


With love, your friend, 
(Joe McK) 



Chapter 35 


I haven’t had any bad dreams for two weeks, almost. I do lots of jigsaw puzzles. They 
give me custard and I hate it, but I eat it just the same. They think I like it. So I have a 
secret again. Finally I have a secret again. 

My mom sent me the yearbook. I haven’t unwrapped it yet, but maybe I will. Maybe 
next week I will. I think I could look at all the senior pictures and not tremble a bit. Pretty 
soon. Just as soon as I can make myself believe that there won’t be any black streaks on 
their hands. That their hands will be clean. With no ink. Maybe next week I’ll be 
completely sure of that. 

About the custard: it’s only a little secret, but having a secret makes me feel better. Like 
a human being again. 

That’s the end. I have to turn off the light now. Good night. 



ROADWORK 
Richard Bachman 

[05 feb 2001 - scanned for #bookz, proofread and released - vl] 

What happens when one good-and-angry man fights back is murder - and then some... 



Why I Was Bachman 


1 

Between 1977 and 1984,1 published five novels under the pseudonym of Richard 
Bachman. These were Rage (1977), The Long Walk (1979), Roadwork (1981), The 
Running Man (1982), and Thinner (1984). There were two reasons I was finally linked 
with Bachman: first, because the first four books, all paperback originals, were dedicated 
to people associated with my life, and second, because my name appeared on the 
copyright forms of one book. Now people are asking me why I did it, and I don’t seem to 
have any very satisfactory answers. Good thing I didn’t murder anyone, isn’t it? 


2 

I can make a few suggestions, but that’s all. The only important thing I ever did in my 
life for a conscious reason was to ask Tabitha Spruce, the college co-ed I was seeing, if 
she would marry me. The reason was that I was deeply in love with her. The joke is that 
love itself is an irrational and indefinable emotion. 

Sometimes something just says Do this or Don’t do that. I almost always obey that 
voice, and when I disobey it I usually rue the day. All I’m saying is that I’ve got a hunch- 
player’s approach to life. My wife accuses me of being an impossibly picky Virgo and I 
guess I am in some ways-I usually know at any given time how many pieces of a 500- 
piece puzzle I’ve put in, for instance-but I never really planned anything big that I ever 
did, and that includes the books I’ve written. I never sat down and wrote page one with 
anything but the vaguest idea of how things would come out. 

One day it occurred to me that I ought to publish Getting It On, a novel which 
Doubleday almost published two years before they published Carrie, under a pseudonym. 
It seemed like a good idea so I did it. 

Like I say, good thing I didn’t kill anybody, huh? 


3 

In 1968 or 1969, Paul McCartney said a wistful and startling thing in an interview. He 
said the Beatles had discussed the idea of going out on the road as a bar-band named 
Randy and the Rockets. They would wear hokey capes and masks a la Count Five, he said, 
so no one would recognize them, and they would just have a raveup like in the old days. 

When the interviewer suggested they would be recognized by their voices, Paul seemed 
at first startled ... and then a bit appalled. 



4 


Cub Koda, possibly America’s greatest houserocker, once told me this story about Elvis 
Presley, and like the man said, if it ain’t true, it oughtta be. Cub said Elvis told an 
interviewer something that went like this: I was like a cow in a pen with a whole bunch of 
other cows, only I got out somehow. Well, they came and got me and put me in another 
pen, only this one was bigger and I had it all to myself. I looked around and seen the 
fences was so high I’d never get out. So I said, “All right, I’ll graze. “ 


5 

I wrote five novels before Carrie. Two of them were bad, one was indifferent, and I 
thought two of them were pretty good. The two good ones were Getting It On (which 
became Rage when it was finally published) and The Long Walk. Getting It On was begun 
in 1966, when I was a senior in high school. I later found it moldering away in an old box 
in the cellar of the house where I’d grown up-this rediscovery was in 1970, and I finished 
the novel in 1971. The Long Walk was written in the fall of 1966 and the spring of 1967, 
when I was a freshman at college. 

I submitted Walk to the Bennett Cerf/Random House first-novel competition (which has, 
I think, long since gone the way of the blue suede shoe) in the fall of 1967 and it was 
promptly rejected with a form note ... no comment of any kind. Hurt and depressed, sure 
that the book must really be terrible, I stuck it into the fabled TRUNK, which all novelists, 
both published and aspiring, carry around. I never submitted it again until Elaine Geiger at 
New American Library asked if “Dicky” (as we called him) was going to follow up Rage. 
The Long Walk went in the TRUNK, but as Bob Dylan says in “Tangled Up in Blue,” it 
never escaped my mind. 

None of them has ever escaped my mind-not even the really bad ones. 


6 

The numbers have gotten very big. That’s part of it. I have times when I feel as if I 
planted a modest packet of words and grew some kind of magic beanstalk .. .or a runaway 
garden of books (OVER 40 MILLION KING BOOKS IN PRINT!!!, as my publisher likes 
to trumpet). Or, put it another way-sometimes I feel like Mickey Mouse in Fantasia. I 
knew enough to get the brooms started, but once they start to march, things are never the 
same. 

Am I bitching? No. At least they’re very gentle bitches if I am. I have tried my best to 
follow that other Dylan’s advice and sing in my chains like the sea. I mean, I could get 
down there in the amen corner and crybaby about how tough it is to be Stephen King, but 
somehow I don’t think all those people out there who are a) unemployed or b) busting 
heavies every week just to keep even with the house payments and the MasterCharge bill 
would feel a lot of sympathy for me. Nor would I expect it. I’m still married to the same 
woman, my kids are healthy and bright, and I’m being well paid for doing something I 
love. So what’s to bitch about? 



Nothing. 

Almost. 


7 

Memo to Paul McCartney, if he’s there: the interviewer was right. They would have 
recognized your voices, but before you even opened your mouths, they would have 
recognized George’s guitar licks. I did five books as Randy and the Rockets and I’ve been 
getting letters asking me if I was Richard Bachman from the very beginning. 

My response to this was simplicity itself: I lied. 


8 

I think I did it to turn the heat down a little bit; to do something as someone other than 
Stephen King. I think that all novelists are inveterate role-players and it was fun to be 
someone else for a while-in this case, Richard Bachman. And he did develop a personality 
and a history to go along with the bogus author photo on the back of Thinner and the 
bogus wife (Claudia Inez Bachman) to whom the book is dedicated. Bachman was a fairly 
unpleasant fellow who was born in New York and spent about ten years in the merchant 
marine after four years in the Coast Guard. He ultimately settled in rural central New 
Hampshire, where he wrote at night and tended to his medium-sized dairy farm during the 
day. The Bachmans had one child, a boy, who died in an unfortunate accident at the age of 
six (he fell through a well cover and drowned). Three years ago a brain tumor was 
discovered near the base of Bachman’s brain; tricky surgery removed it. And he died 
suddenly in February of 1985 when the Bangor Daily News, my hometown paper, 
published the story that I was Bachman-a story which I confirmed. Sometimes it was fun 
to be Bachman, a curmudgeonly recluse a la J. D. Salinger, who never gave interviews and 
who, on the author questionnaire from New English Library in London, wrote down 
“rooster worship” in the blank provided for religion. 

I’ve been asked several times if I did it because I thought I was overpublishing the 
market as Stephen King. The answer is no. I didn’t think I was overpublishing the market 
... but my publishers did. Bachman provided a compromise for both of us. My “Stephen 
King publishers” were like a frigid wifey who only wants to put out once or twice a year, 
encouraging her endlessly horny hubby to find a call girl. Bachman was where I went 
when I had to have relief. This does nothing, however, to explain why I’ve felt this restless 
need to publish what I write when I don’t need the dough. 

I repeat, good thing I didn’t kill someone, huh? 


10 

I’ve been asked several times if I did it because I feel typecast as a horror writer. The 
answer is no. I don’t give a shit what people call me as long as I can go to sleep at night. 

Nevertheless, only the last of the Bachman books is an out-and-out horror story, and the 



fact hasn’t escaped me. Writing something that was not horror as Stephen King would be 
perfectly easy, but answering the questions about why I did it would be a pain in the ass. 
When I wrote straight fiction as Richard Bachman, no one asked the questions. In fact, ha- 
ha, hardly anyone read the books. 

Which leads us to what might be-well, not the reason why that voice spoke up in the first 
place, but the closest thing to it. 


11 

You try to make sense of your life. Everybody tries to do that, I think, and part of 
making sense of things is trying to find reasons ... or constants ... things that don’t 
fluctuate. 

Everyone does it, but perhaps people who have extraordinarily lucky or unlucky lives do 
it a little more. Part of you wants to think-or must as least speculatethat you got whopped 
with the cancer stick because you were one of the bad guys (or one of the good ones, if 
you believe Durocher’s Law). Part of you wants to think that you must have been one 
hardworking S.O.B. or a real prince or maybe even one of the Sainted Multitude if you 
end up riding high in a world where people are starving, shooting each other, burning out, 
bumming out, getting loaded, getting ‘Luded. 

But there’s another part that suggests it’s all a lottery, a real-life game-show not much 
different from “Wheel of Fortune” or “The New Price Is Right” (two of the Bachman 
books, incidentally, are about game-show-type competitions). It is for some reason 
depressing to think it was all-or even mostly-an accident. So maybe you try to find out if 
you could do it again. 

Or in my case, if Bachman could do it again. 


12 

The question remains unanswered. Richard Bachman’s first four books did not sell well 
at all, perhaps partly because they were issued without fanfare. 

Each month paperback houses issue three types of books: “leaders,” which are heavily 
advertised, stocked in dump-bins (the trade term for those showy cardboard displays you 
see at the front of your local chain bookstore), and which usually feature fancy covers that 
have been either die-cut or stamped with foil;” subleaders, ” which are less heavily 
advertised, less apt to be awarded dump-bins, and less expected to sell millions of copies 
(two hundred thousand copies sold would be one hell of a good showing for a sub-leader); 
and just plain books. This third category is the paperback book publishing world’s 
equivalent of trench warfare or ... cannon fodder. “Just plain books” (the only other term I 
can think of is sub-sub-leaders, but that is really depressing) are rarely hardcover reprints; 
they are generally backlist books with new covers, genre novels (gothics, Regency 
romances, westerns, and so on), or series books such as The Survivalist, The Mercenaries, 
The Sexual Adventures of a Horny Pumpkin ... you get the idea. And, every now and 
then, you find genuine novels buried in this deep substratum, and the Bachman novels are 



not the only time such novels have been the work of well-known writers sending out 
dispatches from deep cover. Donald Westlake published paperback originals under the 
names Tucker Coe and Richard Stark; Evan Hunter under the name Ed McBain; Gore 
Vidal under the name Edgar Box. More recently Gordon Lish published an excellent, eerie 
paperback original called The Stone Boy under a pseudonym. 

The Bachman novels were “just plain books,” paperbacks to fill the drugstore and bus- 
station racks of America. This was at my request; I wanted Bachman to keep a low profile. 
So, in that sense, the poor guy had the dice loaded against him from the start. 

And yet, little by little, Bachman gained a dim cult following. His final book, Thinner, 
had sold about 28,000 copies in hardcover before a Washington bookstore clerk and writer 
named Steve Brown got suspicious, went to the Library of Congress, and uncovered my 
name on one of the Bachman copyright forms. Twenty-eight thousand copies isn’t a lot- 
it’s certainly not in best-seller territory-but it’s 4,000 copies more than my book Night 
Shift sold in 1978.1 had intended Bachman to follow Thinner with a rather gruesome 
suspense novel called Misery, and I think that one might have taken “Dicky” onto the best¬ 
seller lists. Of course we’ll never know now, will we? Richard Bachman, who survived the 
brain tumor, finally died of a much rarer disease-cancer of the pseudonym. He died with 
that question-is it work that takes you to the top or is it all just a lottery? -still unanswered. 

But the fact that Thinner did 28,000 copies when Bachman was the author and 280,000 
copies when Steve King became the author, might tell you something, huh? 


13 

There is a stigma attached to the idea of the pen name. This was not so in the past; there 
was a time when the writing of novels was believed to be a rather low occupation, perhaps 
more vice than profession, and a pen name thus seemed a perfectly natural and respectable 
way of protecting one’s self (and one’s relatives) from embarrassment. As respect for the 
art of the novel rose, things changed. Both critics and general readers became suspicious 
of work done by men and women who elected to hide their identities. If it was good, the 
unspoken opinion seems to run, the guy would have put his real name on it. If he lied 
about his name, the book must suck like an Electrolux. 

So I want to close by saying just a few words about the worth of these books. Are they 
good novels? I don’t know. Are they honest novels? Yes, I think so. They were honestly 
meant, anyway, and written with an energy I can only dream about these days (The 
Running Man, for instance, was written during a period of seventy-two hours and 
published with virtually no changes). Do they suck like an Electrolux? Overall, no. In 
places ... wellll ... 

I was not quite young enough when these stories were written to be able to dismiss them 
as juvenilia. On the other hand, I was still callow enough to believe in oversimple 
motivations (many of them painfully Freudian) and unhappy endings. The most recent of 
the Bachman books offered here, Roadwork, was written between ‘Salem‘s Lot and The 
Shining, and was an effort to write a “straight” novel. (I was also young enough in those 
days to worry about that casual cocktail-party question, “Yes, but when are you going to 



do something serious? “) I think it was also an effort to make some sense of my mother’s 
painful death the year before — a lingering cancer had taken her off inch by painful inch. 
Following this death I was left both grieving and shaken by the apparent senselessness of 
it all. I suspect Roadwork is probably the worst of the lot simply because it tries so hard to 
be good and to find some answers to the conundrum of human pain. 

The reverse of this is The Running Man, which may be the best of them because it’s 
nothing but story-it moves with the goofy speed of a silent movie, and anything which is 
not story is cheerfully thrown over the side. 

Both The Long Walk and Rage are full of windy psychological preachments (both textual 
and subtextual), but there’s still a lot of story in those novels-ultimately the reader will be 
better equipped than the writer to decide if the story is enough to surmount all the failures 
of perception and motivation. 

I’d only add that two of these novels, perhaps even all four, might have been published 
under my own name if I had been a little more savvy about the publishing business or if I 
hadn’t been preoccupied in the years they were written with first trying to get myself 
through school and then to support my family. And that I only published them (and am 
allowing them to be republished now) because they are still my friends; they are 
undoubtedly maimed in some ways, but they still seem very much alive to me. 


14 

And a few words of thanks: to Elaine Koster, NAL’s publisher (who was Elaine Geiger 
when these books were first published), who kept “Dicky’s” secret so long and 
successfully to Carolyn Stromberg, “Dicky’s” first editor, who did the same; to Kirby 
McCauley, who sold the rights and also kept the secret faithfully and well; to my wife, 
who encouraged me with these just as she did with the others that fumed out to be such 
big and glittery money-makers; and, as always, to you, reader, for your patience and 
kindness. 

Stephen King 

Bangor, Maine 



